

====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
DAMASCUS
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:27:56


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 10,244
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damascus
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Damascus is the capital and largest city of Syria. It is the oldest capital city in the world. Known colloquially in Syria as aš-Šām and dubbed, poetically, the "City of Jasmine" (مَدِيْنَةُ الْيَاسْمِينِ Madīnat al-Yāsmīn), Damascus is a major cultural center of the Levant and the Arab world.
Situated in southwestern Syria, Damascus is the center of a large metropolitan area. Nestled among the eastern foothills of the Anti-Lebanon mountain range 80 kilometres (50 mi) inland from the eastern shore of the Mediterranean on a plateau 680 metres (2,230 ft) above sea level, Damascus experiences an arid climate because of the rain shadow effect. The Barada River flows through Damascus.
Damascus is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. First settled in the 3rd millennium BC, it was chosen as the capital of the Umayyad Caliphate from 661 to 750. After the victory of the Abbasid dynasty, the seat of Islamic power was moved to Baghdad. According to some, Damascus is the fourth holiest city in Islam. The city saw its importance decline throughout the Abbasid era, only to regain significant importance in the Ayyubid and Mamluk periods.
Today, it is the seat of the central government of Syria. Damascus was named the least livable city out of 140 global cities in the Global Liveability Ranking. As of June 2023, it was the least livable out of 173 global cities in the same Global Liveability Ranking. In 2017, two new development projects were launched in Damascus to build new residential districts, Marota City and Basillia City to symbolize post-war reconstruction.

Names and etymology
The name of Damascus first appeared in the geographical list of Thutmose III as ṯmśq (𓍘𓄟𓊃𓈎𓅱) in the 15th century BC.
The etymology of the ancient name ṯmśq is uncertain. It is attested as Imerišú (𒀲𒋙) in Akkadian, Damašq (𐡃𐡌𐡔𐡒‎) in Old Aramaic and Dammeśeq (דַּמֶּשֶׂק) in Biblical Hebrew. A number of Akkadian spellings are found in the Amarna letters, from the 14th century BC: Dimašqa (𒁲𒈦𒋡), Dimašqì (𒁲𒈦𒀸𒄀), and Dimašqa (𒁲𒈦𒀸𒋡).
Later Aramaic spellings of the name often include an intrusive resh (letter r), perhaps influenced by the root dr, meaning "dwelling". Thus, the English and Latin name of the city is Damascus, which was imported from Greek Δαμασκός and originated from the Qumranic Darmeśeq (דרמשק), and Darmsûq (ܕܪܡܣܘܩ) in Syriac, meaning "a well-watered land".
According to ancient Greek tradition, there were three myths about the origin of the city's name (Δαμασκός). One claims it was named after the giant Ascus (Ἄσκος). Another says it was named after Damaskos, the son of Hermes and the nymph Alimede, who traveled from Arcadia to Syria and founded a city bearing his name. A third version holds that Damaskos was a man who, after Dionysus made Syria fertile with vineyards, cut them down with an axe. Enraged, Dionysus pursued and flayed him. His original name was Darmaskos, which later evolved into Damaskos.
In Arabic, the city is called Dimashq (دمشق Dimašq). The city is also known as aš-Šām by the citizens of Damascus, of Syria and other Arab neighbors and Turkey (Şam). Aš-Šām is an Arabic term for "Levant" and for "Syria"; the latter, and particularly the historical region of Syria, is called Bilād aš-Šām (بلاد الشام, lit. 'land of the Levant'). The latter term etymologically means "land of the left-hand side" or "the north", as someone in the Hijaz facing east, oriented to the sunrise, will find the north to the left. This is contrasted with the name of Yemen (اَلْيَمَن al-Yaman), correspondingly meaning "the right-hand side" or "the south". The variation ش ء م (š-ʾ-m'), of the more typical ش م ل (š-m-l), is also attested in Old South Arabian, 𐩦𐩱𐩣 (šʾm), with the same semantic development.

Geography
Damascus was built in a strategic site on a plateau 680 m (2,230 ft) above sea level and about 80 km (50 mi) inland from the Mediterranean, sheltered by the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, supplied with water by the Barada River, and at a crossroads between trade routes: the north–south route connecting Egypt with Asia Minor, and the east–west cross-desert route connecting Lebanon with the Euphrates river valley. The Anti-Lebanon Mountains mark the border between Syria and Lebanon. The range has peaks of over 10,000 ft (3,000 m) and blocks precipitation from the Mediterranean Sea, so the region of Damascus is sometimes subject to droughts. However, in ancient times, the Barada River mitigated this, which originates from mountain streams fed by melting snow. Damascus is surrounded by the Ghouta, irrigated farmland where many vegetables, cereals, and fruits have been farmed since ancient times. Maps of Roman Syria indicate that the Barada River emptied into a lake of some size east of Damascus. Today it is called Bahira Atayba, the hesitant lake because in years of severe drought, it does not even exist.
The modern city has an area of 105 km2 (41 sq mi), out of which 77 km2 (30 sq mi) is urban, while Jabal Qasioun occupies the rest.

The old city of Damascus, enclosed by the city walls, lies on the south bank of the river Barada which is almost dry (3 cm (1 in) left). To the southeast, north, and northeast it is surrounded by suburban areas whose history stretches back to the Middle Ages: Midan in the southwest, Sarouja and Imara in the north and north-west. These neighborhoods originally arose on roads leading out of the city, near the tombs of religious figures. In the 19th century outlying villages developed on the slopes of Jabal Qasioun, overlooking the city, already the site of the al-Salihiyah neighborhood centered on the important shrine of medieval Andalusian Sheikh and philosopher Ibn Arabi. These new neighborhoods were initially settled by Kurdish soldiery and Muslim refugees from the Europe regions of the Ottoman Empire which had fallen under Christian rule. Thus they were known as al-Akrad (the Kurds) and al-Muhajirin (the migrants). They lay 2–3 km (1–2 mi) north of the old city.
From the late 19th century on, a modern administrative and commercial center began to spring up to the west of the old city, around the Barada, centered on the area known as al-Marjeh or "the meadow". Al-Marjeh soon became the name of what was initially the central square of modern Damascus, with the city hall in it. The courts of justice, post office, and railway station stood on higher ground slightly to the south. A Europeanized residential quarter soon began to be built on the road leading between al-Marjeh and al-Salihiyah. The commercial and administrative center of the new city gradually shifted northwards slightly towards this area.

In the 20th century, newer suburbs developed north of the Barada, and to some extent to the south, invading the Ghouta oasis. In 1956–1957, the new neighborhood of Yarmouk became a second home to many Palestinian refugees. City planners preferred to preserve the Ghouta as far as possible, and in the later 20th century some of the main areas of development were to the north, in the western Mezzeh neighborhood and most recently along the Barada valley in Dummar in the northwest and on the slopes of the mountains at Barzeh in the north-east. Poorer areas, often built without official approval, have mostly developed south of the main city.
Damascus used to be surrounded by an oasis, the Ghouta region (Arabic: الغوطة, romanized: al-ġūṭä), watered by the Barada river. The Fijeh spring, west along the Barada valley, used to provide the city with drinking water, and various sources to the west are tapped by water contractors. The flow of the Barada dropped with the rapid expansion of housing and industry in the city and it is almost dry. The lower aquifers are polluted by the city's runoff from heavily used roads, industry, and sewage.

Climate
Damascus has a cool arid climate (BWk) in the Köppen-Geiger system, due to the rain shadow effect of the Anti-Lebanon Mountains and the prevailing ocean currents. Summers are prolonged, dry, and hot with less humidity. Winters are cool and somewhat rainy; snowfall is infrequent. Autumn is brief and mild, but has the most drastic temperature change, unlike spring where the transition to summer is more gradual and steady. Annual rainfall is around 130 mm (5 in), occurring from October to May.

History
Early settlement
Carbon-14 dating at Tell Ramad, on Damascus's outskirts, suggests that the site may have been occupied since the second half of the seventh millennium BC, possibly around 6300 BC. But evidence of settlement in the wider Barada basin dating to 9000 BC exists, although no large-scale settlement was present within Damascus's walls until the second millennium BC.

Late Bronze
Some of the earliest Egyptian records are the Amarna letters, from 1350 BC, when Damascus (called Dimasqu) was ruled by king Biryawaza. Circa 1260 BC, the Damascus region and the rest of Syria became a battleground between the Hittites from the north and the Egyptians from the south, ending with a signed treaty between Hattusili III and Ramesses II. The former handed over control of the Damascus area to the latter in 1259 BC. The arrival of the Sea Peoples around 1200 BC marked the end of the Bronze Age in the region and brought about new development of warfare. Damascus was only a peripheral part of this picture, which mostly affected the larger population centers of ancient Syria. But these events contributed to Damascus's emergence as an influential center during the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age.
Damascus is mentioned in Genesis 14:15 as existing at the time of the War of the Kings. According to the 1st-century Jewish historian Flavius Josephus's Antiquities of the Jews, Damascus (along with Trachonitis) was founded by Uz, the son of Aram. In Antiquities i. 7, Josephus reports:

Nicolaus of Damascus, in the fourth book of his History, says thus: "Abraham reigned at Damascus, being a foreigner, who came with an army out of the land above Babylon, called the land of the Chaldeans: but, after a long time, he got him up, and removed from that country also, with his people, and went into the land then called the land of Canaan, but now the land of Judea, and this when his posterity became a multitude; as to which posterity of his, we relate their history in another work. Now the name of Abraham is even still famous in the country of Damascus; and there is a village named after him, The Habitation of Abraham.

Aram-Damascus
Damascus is first documented as an important city during the arrival of the Aramaeans, a Semitic people, in the 11th century BC. By the start of the first millennium BC, several Aramaic kingdoms formed, as Aramaeans abandoned their nomadic lifestyle and formed federated tribal states. One of these was Aram-Damascus, centered on its capital, Damascus. The Aramaeans who entered the city without battle adopted the name "Dimashqu" for their new home. Noticing the agricultural potential of the still undeveloped and sparsely populated area, they established a water distribution system by constructing canals and tunnels that maximized the efficiency of the river Barada. The Romans and the Umayyads later improved the network, which still forms the basis of the water system of the old part of the city. The Aramaeans initially turned Damascus into an outpost of a loose federation of Aramaean tribes, known as Aram-Zobah, based in the Beqaa Valley.
The city gained preeminence in southern Syria when Ezron, the claimant to Aram-Zobah's throne who was denied kingship of the federation, fled Beqaa and captured Damascus by force in 965 BC. He overthrew the city's tribal governor and founded the independent entity of Aram-Damascus. As this state expanded south, it prevented the Kingdom of Israel from spreading north and the two kingdoms soon clashed as they both sought to dominate trading hegemony in the east. Under Ezron's grandson, Ben-Hadad I (880–841 BC), and his successor Hazael, Damascus annexed Bashan (modern-day Hauran region), and went on the offensive with Israel. This conflict continued until the early 8th century BC, when Ben-Hadad II was captured by Israel after unsuccessfully besieging Samaria. As a result, he granted Israel trading rights in Damascus.
Another possible reason for the treaty between Aram-Damascus and Israel was the common threat of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, which was trying to expand into the Mediterranean coast. In 853 BC, King Hadadezer of Damascus led a Levantine coalition that included forces from the northern Aram-Hamath kingdom and troops supplied by King Ahab of Israel in the Battle of Qarqar against the Neo-Assyrian army. Aram-Damascus was victorious, temporarily preventing the Assyrians from encroaching into Syria. But after Hadadzezer was killed by his successor, Hazael, the Levantine alliance collapsed. Aram-Damascus tried to invade Israel but was interrupted by the renewed Assyrian invasion. Hazael ordered a retreat to the walled part of Damascus while the Assyrians plundered the remainder of the kingdom. Unable to enter the city, they declared their supremacy in the Hauran and Beqa'a valleys.
By the 8th century BC, Damascus was practically engulfed by the Assyrians and entered a Dark Age. Nonetheless, it remained the economic and cultural center of the Near East as well as the Arameaen resistance. In 727, a revolt took place in the city but was put down by Assyrian forces. After Assyria led by Tiglath-Pileser III went on a wide-scale campaign of quelling revolts throughout Syria, Damascus became subjugated by their rule. One effect of this was stability for the city and benefits from the spice and incense trade with Arabia. In 694 BC, the town was called Šaʾimerišu (Akkadian: 𒐼𒄿𒈨𒊑𒋙𒌋) and its governor was named Ilu-issīya. Assyrian authority dwindled by 609–605 BC, and Syria-Palestine fell into the orbit of Pharaoh Necho II's Egypt. By 572 BC, Nebuchadnezzar II of the Neo-Babylonians had conquered all of Syria, but Damascus's status under Babylon is relatively unknown.

Hellenistic period
Damascus was conquered by Alexander the Great. After his death in 323 BC, it became the site of a struggle between the Seleucid and Ptolemaic empires. Control of the city passed frequently from one empire to the other. Seleucus I Nicator, one of Alexander's generals, made Antioch the capital of his empire, which led to the decline of Damascus's importance compared with new Seleucid cities such as Syrian Laodicea in the north. Later, Demetrius III Philopator rebuilt the city according to the Greek hippodamian system and renamed it "Demetrias".

Roman period
In 64 BC, the Roman general Pompey annexed the western part of Syria. The Romans occupied Damascus and incorporated it into the league of ten cities known as the Decapolis which itself was incorporated into the province of Syria and granted autonomy.
Damascus was entirely redesigned by the Romans after Pompey conquered the region. The Old Town of Damascus retains the rectangular shape of the Roman city, with its two main axes: the Decumanus Maximus (east-west; known today as the Via Recta) and the Cardo (north-south), the Decumanus being about twice as long. The Romans built a monumental gate at the eastern end of Decumanus Maximus. The gate originally had three arches, with the central arch for chariots and others for pedestrians.

In 23 BC, Caesar Augustus gave Herod the Great lands controlled by Zenodorus, and some scholars believe Herod was also granted control of Damascus. Either control of Damascus reverted to Syria upon Herod the Great's death or it was part of the lands given to Herod Philip that were given to Syria with his death in 33/34 AD.
It is speculated that control of Damascus was gained by Aretas IV Philopatris of Nabatea between the death of Herod Philip in 33/34 AD and the death of Aretas in 40 AD, but there is substantial evidence that Aretas did not control the city before 37 AD and there are many reasons it could not have been a gift from Caligula between 37 and 40 AD. In fact, all these theories stem not from any actual evidence outside the New Testament but rather "a certain understanding of 2 Corinthians 11:32" and in reality "neither from archaeological evidence, secular-historical sources, nor New Testament texts can Nabatean sovereignty over Damascus in the first century AD be proven." Roman emperor Trajan, who annexed the Nabataean Kingdom, creating the province of Arabia Petraea, had previously been in Damascus, as his father Marcus Ulpius Traianus was governor of Syria from 73 to 74 AD, where he met the ethnically Greek architect and engineer Apollodorus of Damascus, who joined him in Rome when he was a consul in 91 AD and built several monuments during the 2nd century.
Damascus became a metropolis by the beginning of the 2nd century and in 222 it was upgraded to a colonia by Emperor Septimius Severus. During the Pax Romana, Damascus and the entire Roman province of Syria began to prosper. Damascus's importance as a caravan city was evident, with the trade routes from southern Arabia, Palmyra, Petra, and the Silk Road all converging on it. The city satisfied the Roman demands for eastern luxuries. Circa 125 AD the Roman emperor Hadrian promoted the city of Damascus to "Metropolis of Coele-Syria".
Little remains of the architecture of the Romans, but the town planning of the old city had a lasting effect. Roman architects brought together the city's Greek and Aramaean foundations and fused them into a new layout measuring about 1,500 by 750 m (4,920 by 2,460 ft), surrounded by a wall. The wall had seven gates, but only the eastern gate, Bab Sharqi, remains. Roman Damascus lies mostly at depths of up to five meters (16 feet) below the modern city.

The old borough of Bab Tuma was developed at the end of the Roman/Byzantine era by the local Eastern Orthodox community. According to the Acts of the Apostles, Saint Paul and Saint Thomas both lived in that neighborhood. Roman Catholic historians also consider Bab Tuma the birthplace of several Popes, such as John V and Gregory III. Accordingly, a community of Jewish Christians converted to Christianity with the advent of Saint Paul's proselytization.
During the Byzantine–Sasanian War of 602–628, the city was besieged and captured by Shahrbaraz in 613 along with a large number of Byzantine troops as prisoners. It was in Sasanian hands until near the end of the war.

Rashidun period
The Prophet Muhammad's first indirect interaction with the people of Damascus was when he sent a letter, through his companion Shiya ibn Wahab, to Harith ibn Abi Shamir, the king of Damascus. The letter stated: "Peace be upon him who follows true guidance. Be informed that my religion shall prevail everywhere. You should accept Islam, and whatever under your command shall remain yours."

After most of the Syrian countryside was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate during the reign of Caliph Umar (r. 634–644), Damascus itself was conquered by the Arab Muslim general Khalid ibn al-Walid in August–September 634 CE. His army had previously attempted to capture the city in April 634 but without success. With Damascus now in Muslim-Arab hands, the Byzantines, alarmed at the loss of their most prestigious city in the Near East, had decided to wrest back control of it. Under Emperor Heraclius, the Byzantines fielded an army superior to that of the Rashidun in manpower. They advanced into southern Syria during the spring of 636 and consequently Khalid ibn al-Walid's forces withdrew from Damascus to prepare for renewed confrontation. In August, the two sides met along the Yarmouk River where they fought a major battle which ended in a decisive Muslim victory, solidifying Muslim rule in Syria and Palestine. While the Muslims administered the city, the population of Damascus remained mostly Christian—Eastern Orthodox and Monophysite—with a growing community of Muslims from Mecca, Medina, and the Syrian Desert. The governor assigned to the city which had been chosen as the capital of Islamic Syria was Mu'awiya I.

Umayyad and Abbasid periods
Following the fourth Rashidun caliph Ali's death in 661, Mu'awiya was chosen as the caliph of the expanding Islamic empire. Because of the vast amounts of assets his clan, the Umayyads, owned in the city and because of its traditional economic and social links with the Hijaz as well as the Christian Arab tribes of the region, Mu'awiya established Damascus as the capital of the entire Caliphate. With the ascension of Caliph Abd al-Malik in 685, an Islamic coinage system was introduced, and all the surplus revenue of the Caliphate's provinces was forwarded to the treasury of Damascus. Arabic was also established as the official language, giving the city's Muslim minority an advantage over the Aramaic-speaking Christians in administrative affairs.
Abd al-Malik's successor al-Walid initiated the construction of the Grand Mosque of Damascus (known as the Umayyad Mosque) in 706. The site originally had been the Christian Cathedral of St. John and the Muslims maintained the building's dedication to John the Baptist. By 715, the mosque was complete. Al-Walid died that same year and was succeeded at first by Suleiman ibn Abd al-Malik and then by Umar II, who each ruled for brief periods before the reign of Hisham in 724. With these successions, the status of Damascus was gradually weakening, as Suleiman chose Ramla as his residence and Hisham chose Resafa. Following the murder of the latter in 743, the Caliphate of the Umayyads—which by then stretched from Spain to India—was crumbling as a result of widespread revolts. During the reign of Marwan II in 744, the capital of the empire was relocated to Harran in the Jazira region.

On 25 August 750, the Abbasids, having already beaten the Umayyads in the Battle of the Zab in Iraq, conquered Damascus after facing little resistance. With the heralding of the Abbasid Caliphate, Damascus became eclipsed and subordinated by Baghdad, the new Islamic capital. Within the first six months of Abbasid rule, revolts began erupting in the city, albeit too isolated and unfocused to present a viable threat. Nonetheless, the last of the prominent Umayyads were executed, the traditional officials of Damascus were ostracised, and army generals from the city were dismissed. Afterwards, the Umayyad family cemetery was desecrated and the city walls were torn down, reducing Damascus into a provincial town of little importance. It mostly disappeared from written records for the next century, and the only significant improvement of the city was the Abbasid-built treasury dome in the Umayyad Mosque in 789. In 811, distant remnants of the Umayyad dynasty staged a strong uprising in Damascus that was eventually put down.
On 24 November 847, a multiple earthquake struck and destroyed Damascus, killing about 70,000 people.
Ahmad ibn Tulun, a dissenting Turkish wali appointed by the Abbasids, conquered Syria, including Damascus, from his overlords in 878–79. Out of respect for the Umayyad rulers, he erected a shrine on the site of Mu'awiya's grave. Tulunid rule of Damascus was brief, lasting only until 906 before being replaced by the Qarmatians, who adhered to Shia Islam. Due to their inability to control the vast land they occupied, the Qarmatians withdrew from Damascus and a new dynasty, the Ikhshidids, took control of it. They maintained the independence of Damascus from the Arab Hamdanid dynasty of Aleppo 967. A period of instability in the city followed, with a Qarmatian raid in 968, a Byzantine raid in 970, and increasing pressures from the Fatimids in the south and the Hamdanids in the north.

The Shia Fatimids gained control in 970, inflaming hostilities between them and the city's Sunni Arabs, who frequently revolted. The Turk Alptakin drove out the Fatimids five years later, and through diplomacy, prevented the Byzantines during the Syrian campaigns of John Tzimiskes from attempting to annex the city. But by 977, the Fatimids under Caliph al-Aziz wrested control of the city back and tamed Sunni dissidents. The Arab geographer al-Muqaddasi visited Damascus in 985, remarking that the architecture and infrastructure of the city were "magnificent" but living conditions were awful. Under al-Aziz, the city saw a brief period of stability that ended with the reign of al-Hakim (996–1021). In 998, he executed hundreds of Damascus citizens for incitement. Three years after his mysterious disappearance, a rebellion began in southern Syria against the Fatimids but was stifled by the Fatimid Turkish governor of Syria and Palestine, Anushtakin al-Duzbari, in 1029. This victory gave him mastery over Syria, displeasing his Fatimid overlords but gaining the admiration of Damascus's citizens. He was exiled by Fatimid authorities to Aleppo, where he died in 1041. From that date to 1063, there are no known records of the city's history. By then, Damascus lacked a city administration and had an enfeebled economy and a greatly reduced population.

Seljuq and Ayyubid periods
With the arrival of the Seljuq Turks in the late 11th century, Damascus again became the capital of independent states. It was ruled by Abu Sa'id Taj ad-Dawla Tutush I starting in 1079 and he was succeeded by his son Abu Nasr Duqaq in 1095. The Seljuqs established a court in Damascus and a systematic reversal of Shia inroads in the city. The city also saw an expansion of religious life through private endowments financing religious institutions (madrasas) and hospitals (maristans). Damascus soon became one of the most important centers of propagating Islamic thought in the Muslim world. After Duqaq died in 1104, his mentor (atabeg), Toghtekin, took control of Damascus and the Burid line of the Seljuq dynasty. Under Duqaq and Toghtekin, Damascus experienced stability, elevated status, and a revived role in commerce. In addition, the city's Sunni majority enjoyed being a part of the larger Sunni framework effectively governed by various Turkic dynasties who in turn were under the moral authority of the Baghdad-based Abbasids.
While the rulers of Damascus were preoccupied in conflict with their fellow Seljuqs in Aleppo and Diyarbakir, the Crusaders, who arrived in the Levant in 1097, conquered Jerusalem, Mount Lebanon and Palestine. Duqaq seemed to have been content with Crusader's rule as a buffer between his dominion and the Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt. Toghtekin, however, saw the Western invaders as a viable threat to Damascus which, at the time, nominally included Homs, the Beqaa Valley, Hauran, and the Golan Heights as part of its territories. With military support from Sharaf al-Din Mawdud of Mosul, Toghtekin managed to halt Crusader raids in the Golan and Hauran. Mawdud was assassinated in the Umayyad Mosque in 1109, depriving Damascus of northern Muslim backing and forcing Toghtekin to agree to a truce with the Crusaders in 1110. In 1126, the Crusader army led by Baldwin II fought Burid forces led by Toghtekin at Marj al-Saffar near Damascus; however, despite their tactical victory, the Crusaders failed in their objective to capture Damascus.

Following Toghtekin's death in 1128, his son, Taj al-Muluk Buri, became the nominal ruler of Damascus. Coincidentally, the Seljuq prince of Mosul, Imad al-Din Zengi, took power in Aleppo and gained a mandate from the Abbasids to extend his authority to Damascus. In 1129, around 6,000 Isma'ili Muslims were killed in the city along with their leaders. The Sunnis were provoked by rumors alleging there was a plot by the Isma'ilis, who controlled the strategic fort at Banias, to aid the Crusaders in capturing Damascus in return for control of Tyre. Soon after the massacre, the Crusaders aimed to take advantage of the unstable situation and launch an assault against Damascus with nearly 2,000 knights and 10,000 infantry. However, Buri allied with Zengi and managed to prevent their army from reaching the city. Buri was assassinated by Isma'ili agents in 1132; he was succeeded by his son, Shams al-Mulk Isma'il who ruled tyrannically until he was murdered in 1135 on secret orders from his mother, Safwat al-Mulk Zumurrud; Isma'il's brother, Shihab al-Din Mahmud, replaced him. Meanwhile, Zengi, intent on putting Damascus under his control, married Safwat al-Mulk in 1138. Mahmud's reign then ended in 1139 after he was killed for relatively unknown reasons by members of his family. Mu'in al-Din Unur, his mamluk ("slave soldier") took effective power of the city, prompting Zengi—with Safwat al-Mulk's backing—to lay siege against Damascus the same year. In response, Damascus allied with the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem to resist Zengi's forces. Consequently, Zengi withdrew his army and focused on campaigns against northern Syria.
In 1144, Zengi conquered Edessa, a crusader stronghold, which led to a new crusade from Europe in 1148. In the meantime, Zengi was assassinated and his territory was divided among his sons, one of whom, Nur ad-Din, emir of Aleppo, made an alliance with Damascus. When the European crusaders arrived, they and the nobles of Jerusalem agreed to attack Damascus. Their siege, however, was a complete failure. When the city seemed to be on the verge of collapse, the crusader army suddenly moved against another section of the walls and was driven back. By 1154, Damascus was firmly under Nur ad-Din's control.
In 1164, King Amalric of Jerusalem invaded Fatimid Egypt, requested help from Nur ad-Din. The Nur ad-Din sent his general Shirkuh, and in 1166 Amalric was defeated at the Battle of al-Babein. When Shirkuh died in 1169, he was succeeded by his nephew Yusuf, better known as Saladin, who defeated a joint crusader-Byzantine siege of Damietta. Saladin eventually overthrew the Fatimid caliphs and established himself as Sultan of Egypt. He also began to assert his independence from Nur ad-Din, and with the death of both Amalric and Nur ad-Din in 1174, he was well-placed to begin exerting control over Damascus and Nur ad-Din's other Syrian possessions. In 1177 Saladin was defeated by the crusaders at the Battle of Montgisard, despite his numerical superiority. Saladin also besieged Kerak in 1183, but was forced to withdraw. He finally launched a full invasion of Jerusalem in 1187 and annihilated the crusader army at the Battle of Hattin in July. Acre fell to Saladin soon after, and Jerusalem itself was captured in October. These events shocked Europe, resulting in the Third Crusade in 1189, led by Richard I of England, Philip II of France and Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor, though the last drowned en route.
The surviving crusaders, joined by new arrivals from Europe, put Acre to a lengthy siege which lasted until 1191. After re-capturing Acre, Richard defeated Saladin at the Battle of Arsuf in 1191 and the Battle of Jaffa in 1192, recovering most of the coast for the Christians, but could not recover Jerusalem or any of the inland territory of the kingdom. The crusade came to an end peacefully, with the Treaty of Jaffa in 1192. Saladin allowed pilgrimages to be made to Jerusalem, allowing the Crusaders to fulfill their vows, after which they all returned home. Local crusader barons set about rebuilding their kingdom from Acre and the other coastal cities.
Saladin died in 1193, and there were frequent conflicts between different Ayyubid sultans ruling in Damascus and Cairo. Damascus was the capital of independent Ayyubid rulers between 1193 and 1201, from 1218 to 1238, from 1239 to 1245, and from 1250 to 1260. At other times it was ruled by the Ayyubid rulers of Egypt. During the internecine wars fought by the Ayyubid rulers, Damascus was besieged repeatedly, as, e.g., in 1229.
The patterned Byzantine and Chinese silks available through Damascus, one of the Western termini of the Silk Road, gave the English language "damask".

Mamluk period
Ayyubid rule (and independence) came to an end with the Mongol invasion of Syria in 1260, in which the Mongols led by Kitbuqa entered the city on 1 March 1260, along with the King of Armenia, Hethum I, and the Prince of Antioch, Bohemond VI; hence, the citizens of Damascus saw for the first time for six centuries three Christian potentates ride in triumph through their streets. However, following the Mongol defeat at Ain Jalut on 3 September 1260, Damascus was captured five days later and became the provincial capital of the Mamluk Sultanate, ruled from Egypt, following the Mongol withdrawal. Following their victory at the Battle of Wadi al-Khaznadar, the Mongols led by Ghazan besieged the city for ten days, which surrendered between 30 December 1299, and 6 January 1300, though its Citadel resisted. Ghazan then retreated with most of his forces in February, probably because the Mongol horses needed fodder, and left behind about 10,000 horsemen under the Mongol general Mulay. Around March 1300, Mulay returned with his horsemen to Damascus, then followed Ghazan back across the Euphrates. In May 1300, the Egyptian Mamluks returned from Egypt and reclaimed the entire area without a battle. In April 1303, the Mamluks managed to defeat the Mongol army led by Kutlushah and Mulay along with their Armenian allies at the Battle of Marj al-Saffar, to put an end to Mongol invasions of the Levant. Later on, the Black Death of 1348–1349 killed as much as half of the city's population.
In 1400, Timur, the Turco-Mongol conqueror, besieged Damascus. The Mamluk sultan dispatched a deputation from Cairo, including Ibn Khaldun, who negotiated with him, but after their withdrawal, Timur sacked the city on 17 March 1401. The Umayyad Mosque was burnt and men and women were taken into slavery. A huge number of the city's artisans were taken to Timur's capital at Samarkand. These were the luckier citizens: many were slaughtered and their heads piled up in a field outside the north-east corner of the walls, where a city square still bears the name Burj al-Ru'us (between modern-day Al-Qassaa and Bab Tuma), originally "the tower of heads".
Rebuilt, Damascus continued to serve as a Mamluk provincial capital until 1516.

Ottoman period
In early 1516, the Ottoman Empire, wary of the danger of an alliance between the Mamluks and the Persian Safavids, started a campaign of conquest against the Mamluk sultanate. On 21 September, the Mamluk governor of Damascus fled the city, and on 2 October the khutba in the Umayyad mosque was pronounced in the name of Selim I. The day after, the victorious sultan entered the city, staying for three months. On 15 December, he left Damascus by Bab al-Jabiya, intent on the conquest of Egypt. Little appeared to have changed in the city: one army had simply replaced another. However, on his return in October 1517, the sultan ordered the construction of a mosque, tekkiye and mausoleum at the shrine of Shaikh Muhi al-Din ibn Arabi in al-Salihiyah. This was to be the first of Damascus's great Ottoman monuments.
During this time, according to an Ottoman census, Damascus had 10,423 households.
The Ottomans remained for the next 400 years, except for a brief occupation by Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt from 1832 to 1840. Because of its importance as the point of departure for one of the two great Hajj caravans to Mecca, Damascus was treated with more attention by the Porte than its size might have warranted—for most of this period, Aleppo was more populous and commercially more important. In 1559 the western building of Sulaymaniyya Takiyya, comprising a mosque and khan for pilgrims on the road to Mecca, was completed to a design by the famous Ottoman architect Mimar Sinan, and soon afterward the Salimiyya Madrasa was built adjoining it.

Early in the nineteenth century, Damascus was noted for its shady cafes along the banks of the Barada. A depiction of these by William Henry Bartlett was published in 1836, along with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon, see  Cafes in Damascus. Under Ottoman rule, Christians and Jews were considered dhimmis and were allowed to practice their religious precepts. During the Damascus affair of 1840 the false accusation of ritual murder was brought against members of the Jewish community of Damascus. The massacre of Christians in 1860 was also one of the most notorious incidents of these centuries when fighting between Druze and Maronites in Mount Lebanon spilled over into the city. Several thousand Christians were killed in June 1860, with many more being saved through the intervention of the Algerian exile Abd al-Qadir and his soldiers (three days after the massacre started), who brought them to safety in Abd al-Qadir's residence and the Citadel of Damascus. The Christian quarter of the old city (mostly inhabited by Catholics), including several churches, was burnt down. The Christian inhabitants of the notoriously poor and refractory Midan district outside the walls (mostly Orthodox) were, however, protected by their Muslim neighbors.

American Missionary E.C. Miller records that in 1867 the population of the city was 'about' 140,000, of whom 30,000 were Christians, 10,000 Jews, and 100,000 'Mohammedans' with fewer than 100 Protestant Christians. In the meantime, American writer Mark Twain visited Damascus, then wrote about his travel in The Innocents Abroad, in which he mentioned: "Though old as history itself, thou art fresh as the breath of spring, blooming as thine own rose-bud, and fragrant as thine own orange flower, O Damascus, pearl of the East!". In November 1898, German emperor Wilhelm II toured Damascus, during his trip to the Ottoman Empire.

Modern period
20th century
In the early years of the 20th century, nationalist sentiment in Damascus, initially cultural in its interest, began to take a political coloring, largely in reaction to the turkicisation program of the Committee of Union and Progress government established in Istanbul in 1908. The hanging of a number of patriotic intellectuals by Jamal Pasha, governor of Damascus, in Beirut and Damascus in 1915 and 1916 further stoked nationalist feeling, and in 1918, as the forces of the Arab Revolt and the British Imperial forces approached, residents fired on the retreating Turkish troops.

On 1 October 1918, T. E. Lawrence entered Damascus, the third arrival of the day, the first being the Australian 3rd Light Horse Brigade, led by Major A.C.N. 'Harry' Olden. Two days later, 3 October 1918, the forces of the Arab revolt led by Prince Faisal also entered Damascus. A military government under Shukri Pasha was named and Faisal ibn Hussein was proclaimed king of Syria. Political tension arose in November 1917, when the new Bolshevik government in Russia revealed the Sykes-Picot Agreement whereby Britain and France had arranged to partition the Arab East between them. A new Franco-British proclamation on 17 November promised the "complete and definitive freeing of the peoples so long oppressed by the Turks." The Syrian National Congress in March adopted a democratic constitution. However, the Versailles Conference had granted France a mandate over Syria, and in 1920 a French army commanded by the General Mariano Goybet crossed the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, defeated a small Syrian defensive expedition at the Battle of Maysalun and entered Damascus. The French made Damascus the capital of their League of Nations Mandate for Syria.
When in 1925 the Great Syrian Revolt in the Hauran spread to Damascus, the French suppressed it with heavy weaponry, bombing and shelling the city on 9 May 1926. As a result, the area of the old city between Al-Hamidiyah Souq and Medhat Pasha Souq was burned to the ground, with many deaths, and has since then been known as al-Hariqa ("the fire"). The old city was surrounded with barbed wire to prevent rebels from infiltrating the Ghouta, and a new road was built outside the northern ramparts to facilitate the movement of armored cars. Reporter George Seldes viewed 308 bodies, and suggested there might be more dead under the rubble—and that a maximum might be one thousand.  "When the Muslims, who had rebelled, threatened to kill all Christians, General Maurice Sarrail gave the civilian population time to evacuate, then ordered Fort Gouraud to fire some warning shots, then shell the rebel sector."  
On 21 June 1941, 3 weeks into the Allied Syria-Lebanon campaign, Damascus was captured from the Vichy French forces by a mixed British Indian and Free French force. The French agreed to withdraw in 1946, following the British intervention during the Levant Crisis, thus leading to the full independence of Syria. Damascus remained the capital and has been unchanged even following the start of Ba'athist rule in 1963.
In 1979, the Old City of Damascus, with its collection of archaeological and historical religious sites, was listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.

Civil war
By January 2012, clashes between the regular army and rebels reached the outskirts of Damascus, reportedly preventing people from leaving or reaching their houses, especially when security operations there intensified from the end of January into February.
By June 2012, bullets and shrapnel shells smashed into homes in Damascus overnight as troops battled the Free Syrian Army in the streets. At least three tank shells slammed into residential areas in the central Damascus neighborhood of Qaboun, according to activists. Intense exchanges of assault rifle fire marked the clash, according to residents and amateur video posted online.
The Damascus suburb of Ghouta suffered heavy bombing in December 2017 and a further wave of bombing started in February 2018, also known as Rif Dimashq Offensive.
On 20 May 2018, Damascus and the entire Rif Dimashq Governorate came fully under government control for the first time in 7 years after the evacuation of IS from Yarmouk Camp. In September 2019, Damascus entered the Guinness World Records as the least liveable city, scoring 30.7 points on the Economist's Global Liveability Index in 2019, based on factors such as: stability, healthcare, culture and environment, education, and infrastructure. However, the trend of being the least liveable city on Earth started in 2017, and continued as of 2024.

Syrian rebels, led by the HTS rebel group entered Damascus on 8 December 2024 after a series of offensives, capturing Sednaya Prison and later resulting in the collapse of Ba'athist Syria.
On 23 February 2025, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu demanded the complete demilitarization of southern Syria in the provinces of Quneitra, Daraa and Suweyda, and the withdrawal of Syrian forces from Syrian territory south of Damascus. Syria's new government under President Ahmed al-Sharaa rejected Netanyahu's demands. Hours later, Israel conducted a wave of airstrikes in Damascus and southern Syria.

Economy
The historical role that Damascus played as an important trade center has changed in recent years due to political development in the region as well as the development of modern trade. Most goods produced in Damascus, as well as in Syria, are distributed to countries of the Arabian peninsula. Damascus has also held an annual international trade exposition every fall, since 1954.
The tourism industry in Damascus has a lot of potential, however, the civil war has hampered these prospects. The abundance of cultural wealth in Damascus has been modestly employed since the late 1980s with the development of many accommodation and transportation establishments and other related investments. Since the early 2000s, numerous boutique hotels and bustling cafes opened in the old city which attracts plenty of European tourists and Damascenes alike.
In 2009 new office space was built and became available on the real estate market. Marota City and Basilia City are two new development projects in Damascus. These two projects are viewed as post-war reconstruction efforts. The Damascus stock exchange formally opened for trade in March 2009, and the exchange is the only stock exchange in Syria. It is located in the Barzeh district, within Syria's financial markets and securities commission. Its final home is to be located in the upmarket business district of Yaafur.
Damascus is home to a wide range of industrial activities, such as textile, food processing, cement, and various chemical industries. The majority of factories are run by the state, however limited privatization in addition to economic activities led by the private sector, were permitted starting in the early 2000s with the liberalization of trade that took place.
Traditional handcrafts and artisan copper engravings are still produced in the old city.

Demographics
Population
In the 2004 Census of Population conducted by Central Bureau of Statistics (Syria), Damascus had a population of 1,552,161 living in 309,317 of its 345,097 total dwellings.
Damascus is the center of a crowded metropolitan area with an estimated population of 5 million. The metropolitan area of Damascus includes the cities of Douma, Harasta, Darayya, Al-Tall and Jaramana.
The city's growth rate is higher than in Syria as a whole, primarily due to rural-urban migration and the influx of young Syrian migrants drawn by employment and educational opportunities. The migration of Syrian youths to Damascus has resulted in an average age within the city that is below the national average. Nonetheless, the population of Damascus is thought to have decreased in recent years as a result of the ongoing Syrian civil war.

Ethnicity
The vast majority of Damascenes are Syrian Arabs. The Kurds are the second largest ethnic minority, with a population of approximately 300,000. They reside primarily in the neighborhoods of Wadi al-Mashari ("Zorava" or "Zore Afa" in Kurdish) and Rukn al-Din. Other minorities include Palestinians, Armenians, Assyrians, Turkmens, Circassians and a small Greek community.

Religion
Islam is the largest religion. The majority of Muslims are Sunni while Alawites and Twelver Shi'a comprise sizeable minorities. Alawites live primarily in the neighbourhoods of Mezzeh 86 and Sumariyah part of the Mezzeh district, in addition to the neighbourhood of Eish al-Warwar in the district of Barzeh. Twelvers primarily live near the Shia holy sites of Sayyidah Ruqayya and Sayyidah Zaynab. It is believed that there are more than 200 mosques in Damascus, the most well-known being the Umayyad Mosque.
Christians represent about 10%–15% of the population. Several Eastern Christian rites have their headquarters in Damascus, including the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Syriac Catholic Church, the Melkite Greek Catholic Church, and the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch. The Christian districts in the city are Bab Tuma, Qassaa and Ghassani. Each have many churches, most notably the ancient Chapel of Saint Paul, St. Paul Cathedral, Our Lady of the Dormition Cathedral, and St Georges Cathedral in Bab Tuma. At the suburb of Soufanieh a series of apparitions of the Virgin Mary have reportedly been observed between 1982 and 2004. The Patriarchal See of the Syriac Orthodox is based in Damascus, Bab Touma.
A smaller Druze minority inhabits the city, notably in the mixed Christian-Druze suburbs of Tadamon, Jaramana, and Sahnaya.
There was a small Jewish community namely in what is called Harat al-Yahud ("the Jewish quarter"). They are the remnants of an ancient and much larger Jewish presence in Syria, dating back at least to Roman times, if not before to the time of King David. There was once a significant Jewish community in Damascus, but as of 2023, no Jews remain.

Sufism
Sufism throughout the second half of the 20th century has been an influential current in the Sunni religious practises, particularly in Damascus. The largest women-only and girls-only Muslim movement in the world happens to be Sufi-oriented and is based in Damascus, led by Munira al-Qubaysi. Syrian Sufism has its stronghold in urban regions such as Damascus, where it also established political movements such as Zayd, with the help of a series of mosques, and clergy such as Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi, Sa'id Hawwa, Abd al-Rahman al-Shaghouri and Muhammad al-Yaqoubi.

Historical sites
The Ancient City of Damascus was inscribed on the World Heritage List in 1979. Beginning with the Aramaic kingdom (11th-7th centuries BC), Damascus grew into the political and urban hub for the region. Today, the ancient city encompasses over 125 cultural heritage sites that represent Damascus's long history, including archaeological and architectural remains from the Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine, Islamic, and Ottoman periods. Tragically, ongoing conflict and war continues to threaten the archaeological heritage and prevent archaeological discovery of Damascus.

The Citadel of Damascus is in the northwest corner of the Old City. The Damascus Straight Street (referred to in the account of the conversion of St. Paul in Acts 9:11), also known as the Via Recta, was the decumanus (east–west main street) of Roman Damascus, and extended for over 1,500 m (4,900 ft). Today, it consists of the street of Bab Sharqi and the Souk Medhat Pasha, a covered market. The Bab Sharqi street is filled with small shops and leads to the old Christian quarter of Bab Tuma (St. Thomas's Gate), where St George's Cathedral, the seat of the Syriac Orthodox Church, is notably located. Medhat Pasha Souq is also a main market in Damascus and was named after Midhat Pasha, the Ottoman governor of Syria who renovated the Souk. At the end of Bab Sharqi Street, one reaches the House of Ananias, an underground chapel that was the cellar of Ananias's house. The Umayyad Mosque, also known as the Grand Mosque of Damascus, is one of the largest mosques in the world and also one of the oldest sites of continuous prayer since the rise of Islam. A shrine in the mosque is said to contain the body of St. John the Baptist. The mausoleum where Saladin was buried is located in the gardens just outside the mosque. Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque, the shrine of the youngest daughter of Husayn ibn Ali, can also be found near the Umayyad Mosque. The ancient district of Amara is also within walking distance from these sites. Another heavily visited site is Sayyidah Zaynab Mosque, where the tomb of Zaynab bint Ali is located. Shias, Fatemids, and Dawoodi Bohras believe that after the battle of Karbala (680 AD), in Iraq, the Umayyad Caliph Yezid brought Imam Husain's head to Damascus, where it was first kept in the courtyard of Yezid Mahal, now part of Umayyad Mosque complex. All other remaining members of Imam Husain's family (left alive after Karbala) along with the heads of all other companions, who were killed at Karbala, were also brought to Damascus. These members were kept as prisoners on the outskirts of the city (near Bab al-Saghir), where the other heads were kept at the same location, now called Ru'ûs ash-Shuhadâ-e-Karbala or ganj-e-sarha-e-shuhada-e-Karbala. There is a qibla (place of worship) marked at the place, where devotees say Imam Ali-Zain-ul-Abedin used to pray while in captivity.
The Harat Al Yehud or Jewish Quarter is a recently restored historical tourist destination popular among Europeans before the outbreak of civil war. Vacationers can enjoy the neighborhood and scenic ancient homes abandoned by the completely departed Syrian Jewish community.

Walls and gates of Damascus
The Old City of Damascus with an approximate area of 86.12 hectares is surrounded by ramparts on the northern and eastern sides and part of the southern side. There are seven extant city gates, the oldest of which dates back to the Roman period. These are, clockwise from the north of the citadel:

Bab al-Faradis ("the gate of the orchards", or "of the paradise")
Bab al-Salam ("the gate of peace"), all on the north boundary of the Old City
Bab Tuma ("Touma" or "Thomas's Gate") in the north-east corner, leading into the Christian quarter of the same name,
Bab Sharqi ("eastern gate") in the east wall, the only one to retain its Roman plan
Bab Kisan in the south-east, from which tradition holds that Saint Paul made his escape from Damascus, lowered from the ramparts in a basket; this gate has been closed and turned into Chapel of Saint Paul marking this event,
Bab al-Saghir (The Small Gate)
Bab al-Jabiya at the entrance to Souk Midhat Pasha, in the southwest.
Other areas outside the walled city also bear the name "gate": Bab al-Faraj, Bab Mousalla and Bab Sreija, both to the south-west of the walled city.

Churches in the old city
Chapel of Saint Paul
House of Saint Ananias
Mariamite Cathedral of Damascus
Cathedral of the Dormition of Our Lady
Saint John the Damascene Church
Saint Paul's Laura
Saint George's Syriac Orthodox Cathedral

Islamic sites in the old city
Umayyad Mosque, also known as the Great Mosque of Damascus
Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque
Bab Saghir Cemetery
Mausoleum of Saladin
Nabi Habeel Mosque

Madrasas
Al-Adiliyah Madrasa
Az-Zahiriyah Library
Nur al-Din Madrasa

Khans
Khan Jaqmaq
Khan As'ad Pasha
Khan Sulayman Pasha

Old Damascene houses
Azm Palace, originally built in 1750 as the residence for the Ottoman governor of Damascus As'ad Pasha al-Azm, housing the Museum of Arts and Popular Traditions.
Bayt al-Aqqad
Bayt Farhi, a large late-18th-century courtyard Jewish mansion built for the prominent Farhi family.
Maktab Anbar, a mid-19th-century Jewish private mansion, restored by the Ministry of Culture in 1976 to serve as a library, exhibition center, museum and craft workshops.
Beit al-Mamlouka, a 17th-century Damascene house, serving as a luxury boutique hotel within the old city since 2005.

Threats to the future of the old City
Due to the rapid decline of the population of Old Damascus (between 1995 and 2009 about 30,000 people moved out of the old city for more modern accommodation), a growing number of buildings are being abandoned or are falling into disrepair. In March 2007, the local government announced that it would be demolishing Old City buildings along a 1,400 m (4,600 ft) stretch of rampart walls as part of a redevelopment scheme. These factors resulted in the Old City being placed by the World Monuments Fund on its 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites in the world. It is hoped that its inclusion on the list will draw more public awareness to these significant threats to the future of the historic Old City of Damascus.

State of old Damascus
In spite of the recommendations of the UNESCO World Heritage Center:

Souq al-Atiq, a protected buffer zone, was destroyed in three days in November 2006;
King Faysal Street, a traditional hand-craft region in a protected buffer zone near the walls of Old Damascus between the Citadel and Bab Touma, is threatened by a proposed motorway.
In 2007, the Old City of Damascus and notably the district of Bab Tuma have been recognized by The World Monument Fund as one of the most endangered sites in the world.
In October 2010, Global Heritage Fund named Damascus one of 12 cultural heritage sites most "on the verge" of irreparable loss and destruction.

Education
Damascus is the main center of education in Syria. It is home to Damascus University, which is the oldest and largest university in Syria. After the enactment of legislation allowing private higher institutions, several new universities were established in the city and the surrounding area, including:

Syrian Virtual University
International University for Science and Technology
Syrian Private University
Arab International University
University of Kalamoon
Yarmouk Private University
Wadi International University
Al-Jazeera University
European University Damascus
The institutes play an important rule in the education, including:

Higher Institute of Business Administration
Higher Institute of Applied Science and Technology
Higher Institute of Dramatic Arts
National Institute of Administration
In Damascus, Higher education in Syrian Arab Republic started with sustainable development steps through Damascus University. 

Additional:
Syrian International Academy for Training and Development

Transportation
Damascus is linked with other major cities in Syria via a motorway network. The M5 connects Damascus with Homs, Hama, Aleppo and Turkey in the north and Jordan in the south. The M1 is going from Homs onto Latakia and Tartus.
The M4 links the city with Al-Hasakah and Iraq. The M1 highway connects the city to western Syria and Beirut.
The main airport is Damascus International Airport, approximately 20 km (12 mi) away from the city, with connections to a few Middle Eastern cities. Before the beginning of the Syrian civil war, the airport had connectivity to many Asian, European, African, and, South American cities.

Streets in Damascus are often narrow, especially in the older parts of the city, and speed bumps are widely used to limit the speed of vehicles. Many taxi companies operate in Damascus. Fares are regulated by law and taxi drivers are obliged to use a taximeter.
Public transport in Damascus depends extensively on buses and minibuses. There are about one hundred lines that operate inside the city and some of them extend from the city center to nearby suburbs. There is no schedule for the lines, and due to the limited number of official bus stops, buses will usually stop wherever a passenger needs to get on or off. The number of buses serving the same line is relatively high, which minimizes the waiting time. Lines are not numbered, rather they are given captions mostly indicating the two endpoints and possibly an important station along the line. Between 2019 and 2022, more than 100 modern buses were delivered from China as part of the international agreement. These deliveries strengthened and modernized the public transport of Damascus.
Served by Chemins de Fer Syriens, the former main railway station of Damascus was al-Hejaz railway station, about 1 km (5⁄8 mi) west of the old city. The station is now defunct and the tracks have been removed, but there still is a ticket counter and a shuttle to Damascus Qadam station in the south of the city, which now functions as the main railway station.
In 2008, the government announced a plan to construct a Damascus Metro. The green line will be an essential west–east axis for the future public transportation network, serving Moadamiyeh, Sumariyeh, Mezzeh, Damascus University, Hijaz, the Old City, Abbassiyeen and Qaboun Pullman bus station. A four-line metro network is expected to be in operation by 2050.

Culture
Damascus was chosen as the 2008 Arab Capital of Culture. The preparation for the festivity began in February 2007 with the establishing of the Administrative Committee for "Damascus Arab Capital of Culture" by a presidential decree. Museums in Damascus includes National Museum of Damascus, Azem Palace, Military Museum, October War Panorama Museum, Museum of Arabic Calligraphy and Nur al-Din Bimaristan

Sports and leisure
Popular sports include football, basketball, swimming, tennis, table tennis, equestrian and chess. Damascus is home to many football clubs that participate in the Syrian Premier League including al-Jaish, al-Shorta, Al-Wahda and Al-Majd. Many Other sports clubs are located in several districts of the city: Barada SC, Al-Nidal SC, Al-Muhafaza, Qasioun SC, al-Thawra SC, Maysalun SC, al-Fayhaa SC, Dummar SC, al-Majd SC and al-Arin SC.
The fifth and the seventh Pan Arab Games were held in Damascus in 1976 and 1992 respectively.
The now modernized Al-Fayhaa Sports City features a basketball court and a hall that can accommodate up to 8,000 people. In late November 2021, Syria's national basketball team played there against Kazakhstan, making Damascus host of Syria's first international basketball tournament in almost two decades.
The city also has a modern golf course located near the Ebla Cham Palace Hotel on the southeastern outskirts of Damascus.
Damascus has a busy nightlife. Coffeehouses offer Arabic coffee, tea and  nargileh (water pipes). Card games, tables (backgammon variants), and chess are activities frequented in cafés. These coffeehouses had an international reputation in the past, as indicated by Letitia Elizabeth Landon's poetical illustration, Cafes in Damascus, to a picture by William Henry Bartlett in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1837. Current movies can be seen at Cinema City which was previously known as Cinema Dimashq.

Tishreen Park is one of the largest parks in Damascus. It is home to the annual Damascus Flower Show. Other parks include al-Jahiz, al-Sibbki, al-Tijara, al-Wahda, etc... The city's famous Ghouta oasis is also a weekend destination for recreation. Many recreation centers operate in the city including sports clubs, swimming pools, and golf courses. The Syrian Arab Horse Association in Damascus offers a wide range of activities and services for horse breeders and riders.

Nearby attractions
Madaya: a small mountainous town and well-known holiday resort.
Bloudan: a town located 51 km (32 mi) north-west of Damascus, its moderate temperature and low humidity in summer attracts many visitors from Damascus and throughout Syria, Lebanon and the Persian Gulf.
Zabadani: a city close to the border with Lebanon. Its mild weather along with the scenic views, made the town a popular resort both for tourists and for visitors from other Syrian cities.
Maaloula: a town dominated by speakers of Western Neo-Aramaic.
Saidnaya: a city located in the mountains, 1,500 metres (4,921 ft) above sea level, it was one of the episcopal cities of the ancient Patriarchate of Antioch.

Twin towns – sister cities
Notable people
See also
Damascus Document
List of World Heritage in Danger

Notes
References
Bibliography
Abdulkarim, Maamoun (2003). Apollodorus of Damascus and Trajan's Column. L'Erma di Bretschneider. ISBN 978-8-8826-5233-3.
Aharoni, Yohanan; Avi-Yonah, Michael (1977). The MacMillan Bible Atlas. Carta Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7318-1071-0.
Amitai, Reuven (1987). "Mongol Raids into Palestine (AD 1260 and 1300)". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society: 236–255.
Burns, Ross (2005). Damascus: A History. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-27105-9.
Cammelli, Stefano (2006). Il Minareto di Gesù. Il Mulino.
Crawford, Peter (2013). The War of the Three Gods: Romans, Persians and the Rise of Islam. Pen and Sword. ISBN 9781473828650.
Demurger, Alain (2007). Jacques de Molay (in French). Editions Payot&Rivages. ISBN 978-2-228-90235-9.
Hamilton, Jill, Duchess of (2002). First to Damascus: The story of the Australian Light Horse and Lawrence of Arabia. Kangaroo Press. ISBN 978-0-7318-1071-0.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)
Ibn Khaldun (1952). Ibn Khaldūn and Tamerlane: Their Historic Meeting in Damascus, 1401 A.d. (803 A. H.) A Study Based on Arabic Manuscripts of Ibn Khaldūn's "Autobiography,". Translated by Walter Joseph Fischel. University of California Press.
Kaegi, Walter Emil (2003). Heraclius: Emperor of Byzantium. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-81459-6.
Nicolle, David (2001). The Crusades. Essential Histories. Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-179-4.
Runciman, Steven (1987). A History of the Crusades: Volume 3, The Kingdom of Acre and the Later Crusades. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521347723.
Schein, Sylvia (October 1979). "Gesta Dei per Mongolos 1300. The Genesis of a Non-Event". The English Historical Review. 94 (373): 805–819. doi:10.1093/ehr/XCIV.CCCLXXIII.805. JSTOR 565554.
Twain, Mark (1869). The Innocents Abroad. American Publishing Company.

External links

Macalister, R. A. Stewart (1911). "Damascus" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.).
Map of Damascus, 1929, Eran Laor Cartographic Collection, The National Library of Israel, Historic Cities Research Project.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 9,126
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%AF%D9%85%D8%B4%D9%82
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

دِمَشْق هي عاصمة الجمهورية العربية السورية، ومركز محافظة دمشق. وهي إحدى أقدم مدن العالم مع تاريخ غير منقطع منذ أحد عشر ألف عام تقريبًا، وأقدم مدينة - عاصمة في العالم. أصبحت عاصمة منطقة سوريا منذ عام 635.
هناك عدة نظريات في شرح معنى اسم دمشق، أوفرها انتشارًا كون اللفظة سامية قديمة بمعنى الأرض المسقية؛ يعود ذلك لموقع المدينة الجغرافي في سهل خصيب يرويه نهر بردى وفروعه العديدة، مشكلاً بذلك غوطة دمشق؛ وأيضًا يتميز موقع المدينة بوجود جبل قاسيون فيها. اقتصرت تسمية دمشق على المدينة القديمة حتى القرون الوسطى، حين أخذت المدينة بالتوسّع خارجها، حاليًا تتألف دمشق من خمسة عشر منطقة سكنية متصلة بمحيطها من الضواحي لتشكل ما يعرف باسم دمشق الكبرى.
المدينة تعدّ المركز الإداري لمحافظة دمشق، بينما تتبع معظم الضواحي إداريًا لمحافظة ريف دمشق. حسب إحصاءات عام 2013 فإن عدد سكان دمشق بلغ 1.9 مليون نسمة، لتكون بذلك ثاني أكبر المدن السورية بعد حلب، بينما يبلغ عدد سكان دمشق الكبرى (حسب إحصاء 2010) 4.4 مليون نسمة، لتكون بذلك أكبر تجمع سكاني في سوريا، وبر الشام، وضمن أكبر عشر مدن في الوطن العربي بعد القاهرة، وبغداد والرياض؛ وتبلغ مساحة المدينة 105 كم2؛ غالبية سكان دمشق التقليدية هم من عرب سوريا على صعيد العرق، ومن المسلمين السنة على صعيد الدين. عبر التاريخ، سكنت دمشق جماعات صغيرة العدد، من أصول أوروبية - بلقانية بشكل أساسي - وعربية، بدواع مختلفة، انسجم أغلبها بمرور الوقت مع نسيج المدينة؛ تحوي دمشق أيضًا أعدادًا كبيرة من المواطنين المنحدرين من سائر المدن والمحافظات السورية، كمقيمين دائمين فيها. بوصفها العاصمة، فإن دمشق مقر جميع الوزرات والمقرات الهامة في الدولة السورية، بما فيها البرلمان، والمحكمة الدستورية العليا.
منذ العصور القديمة، اشتهرت دمشق بوصفها مدينة تجارية، تقصدها القوافل للراحة أو التبضع، كانت المدينة إحدى محطات طريق الحرير، وطريق البحر، وموكب الحج الشامي، والقوافل المتجهة إلى فارس أو آسيا الصغرى أو مصر أو الجزيرة العربية. هذا الدور الاقتصادي البارز لعب دورًا في إغناء المدينة وتحويلها إلى مقصد ثقافي وسياسي أيضًا، فالمدينة كانت خلال تاريخها مركزًا لعدد من الدول أهمها الدولة الأموية - أكبر دولة إسلامية من حيث المساحة في التاريخ، وفيها أقامت ودفنت شخصيات بارزة في تاريخ الشرق مثل صلاح الدين الأيوبي والظاهر بيبرس. أما حاليًا، فيقوم اقتصاد دمشق على التجارة، والصناعة المنتشرة في الضواحي، والسياحة، وقد اعتبرت دمشق عام 2010 واحدة من أفضل المقاصد السياحية في العالم، إلا أنّ الأزمة السورية المندلعة منذ 2011، أفضت إلى تراجع كبير في اقتصاد المدينة، وبروز أزمات اجتماعية واقتصادية فيها. اعتبارًا من سبتمبر 2019،
أي بعد مرور ما يُقارب ثماني سنوات على الحرب الأهلية، تم تصنيف دمشق على أنها المدينة الأقل ملاءمةً للعيش في العالم، من قبل وحدة الاستخبارات الاقتصادية. صنفت دمشق في عام 2022 أسوأ مدينة في العالم من حيث العيش.
تُعرف أيضًا بأسماء عديدة منها الشام و مدينة الياسمين؛ وقد احتلت مكانة إقليمية بارزة على صعيد الفنون، والآداب، والسياسة؛ وحظيت باهتمام الأدباء والشعراء والرحالة ونظم في وصفها العديد من النصوص الشعريّة والأدبيّة، نذكر منهم ياقوت الحموي الذي كتب:

ويقول نزار قباني:

أصل التسمية
من أقدم الوثائق التي ذكرت فيها دمشق على مرِّ التاريخ رُقم مدينة إيبلا العائدة إلى حوالي عام 2000 ق.م، إذ وردَ ذكرها تحتَ مُسمَّى داماسكي. كما أن ذكرها جاءَ أكثرَ من مرَّة في النصوص المصريَّة القديمة، ومن أبرزها ألواح تحتمس الثالث العائدة إلى القرن الخامس عشر قبل الميلاد، حيثُ ذكرت باسم تيمساك، وفي رسائل تل العمارنة باسم تيماشكي. وفي الفترات التي تبعت ذلك تعاقبت عدة أسماء عليها مع كل دولة جديدة كانت تحكم المنطقة، فأطلق عليها الآشوريون دَمَشْقا وأحياناً استخدموا اسم إيميري شو أيضًا، والآراميون كانوا يُطلقون عليها اسم ديماشقو، كما ورد اسمي دارميساك أو دارميسيق في بعض النصوص الآرامية الذي قد يَعني «الدَّار/الأرض المسقية» أو «المكان الوافر بالمياه» أو «أرض الحجر الكلسي». ومنه في العصور الأنتيكية، عرف في اللغة اللاتينية، ومنها اللغات الأوروبية المعاصرة ببعض التحريف في النطق ليُصبح داماسْكُس (باللاتينية: Damascus).
بعد الفتح الإسلامي للشام عُرفت المدينة بالكثير من الأسماء، منها دمشق الشام تمييزاً لها عن مدينة غرناطة في الأندلس التي سُميت أيضاً دمشق العرب، وذاتَ العِماد لكثرة الأعمدة في أبنيتها، وباب الكعبة لوُجودها على طريق مكة، والفَيْحَاء لاتساعها ورائحتها الزكية، بالإضافة إلى عدة أسماء وألقاب أخرى منها جِلَّق وحصن الشام وفسطاط المسلمين. كما تُسمَّى أيضاً الشام، على طريقة تسمية الفرع باسم الأصل. يُوجد خلاف كبيرٌ وافتراضات عديدة بشأن أصل اسم دمشق نفسه وطريقة اشتقاقه في العربية؛ فأنصار الجذر العربي للاسم يرونه ناجمًا عن مصطلح دَمْشَقَ في العربية القديمة أي «إذا أسرع»، ولذلك يُقال أن المدينة سُميت باسمها لأن «أبناءها دَمْشَقوا – أي أسرعوا – في بنائها». أما غالب المؤرخين الذين أعادوا اللفظة لكونها سريانية، أو لاتينية، لا العربية، فيرون أنه اشتق من كلمة دُومَسْكَس بمعنى المسك أو الرائحة الطيِّبة، فيما يَرى آخرون أنها سُمِّيت تيمناً بالقائد اليونانيّ دماس الذي أسَّسَ المدينة، ونظراً إلى ذكر المدينة في رسائل تل العمارنة والكرنك في مصر باللغة الهيروغليفيِّة تحتَ مُسمَّى دِمَشْقُوا ودَمْشَقَا؛ كما ساد الاعتقاد بأن الكلمة مشتقة من اسم أحد أحفاد النبي نوح دَمَاشِق.
في الأيام الراهنة، تعرف دمشق في اللهجة السورية باسم الشام؛ أما أكثر ألقابها شهرة فهي، مدينة الياسمين، وجلّق، والفيحاء، إلى جانب عدد من الألقاب الأقل انتشارًا مثل درة الشرق، شامة الدنيا، شام شريف والتي كانت منتشرة بشكل رسمي خلال سوريا العثمانية، كنانة الله، الدار المسقية.

التاريخ
ما قبل العصر البرونزي
بحسب عمليات التنقيب والبحث التي تركزت في الغوطة ووادي نهر بردى فإن منطقة دمشق مأهولة بالبشر منذ ما يقارب 10,000 عام أي خلال مرحلة الصيد والانتقال، وقد عثر إضافة لآثار الإنسان العاقل على آثار لإنسان نياندرتال، وأبرز ما آثر عن تلك الحقبة فؤوس ومقاحف حجرية وغيرها من الأدوات اليدوية، غير أن الفترة الممتدة من انقراض إنسان نياندرتال قبل 40,000 عام وحتى 30,000 عام تلبث شديدة الغموض في تاريخ دمشق، وكذلك في تاريخ سائر الشرق الأوسط عمومًا، ثم تعود الآثار البشرية والحضرية للظهور مع دخول العصر الزراعي قبل 30,000 عام تقريبًا، إذ عثر على العديد من القرى والمستوطنات البدائية، خصوصًا في منطقة تل الأسود وتل الغريفة،  وقد عُثر في هاتين البقعتين من دمشق على أقدم مخازن الحبوب في العالم وبعض حبيبات من الشعير والقمح المتفحم، أما عن نمط الحياة حينها فقد بنى السكان الأوائل أكواخًا بيضوية صغيرة الحجم استخدم في بنائها الطين واللبن والقصب وهي من المواد التي كانت متوفرة بكثرة في المستنقعات والبحيرات التي كانت تسوّر المدينة، وجفّت مع تتالي الحُقب.
وبحسب تحليل مادة الكربون 14 فإن موقع تل الرماد يرجع تاريخه إلى النصف الثاني من الألف السابع قبل الميلاد وربما نحو 6300 قبل الميلاد، وقد شهدت المستوطنة البشرية تطورًا حياتيًا فاستعمل الحجر في بنائها ورصفت شوارعها بالحجارة أيضًا، وعثر في موقع تل الغريقة على أقبية ومخازن ومواقد للشيْ، وطور السكان نظام سقاية بسيط، كما عثر أيضًا على عدد وافر من عظام الماعز والغنم وغيرها من الحيوانات المدجنة، ورغم عدم تمكن المنقبين من وضع تصور دقيق حول الفن والحياة الاجتماعية والدين في دمشق خلال تلك الفترة، إلا أنّ المكتشفات تدلّ على وجود نوع من الفن وحياة اجتماعية متكاملة في كلا الموقعين. مستوطنة تل الغريقة دمرت في الألف الخامس قبل الميلاد، غير أنه خلال الفترة نفسها بنيت مستوطنة ثالثة شمال الغوطة، ويشير الباحثون إلى أن عددًا من السكان عاد إلى التنقل بدلاً من الاستقرار بدليل آثار المنازل الضعيفة الصنع، والتي تشير إلى تنقل مستمر بين المناطق، وإلى وفرة عظام الحيوانات، ما يدلّ على امتهان الرعي. كما يشير تحليل الكربون 14 في ولعلّ تطور الحركة العمرانية في المدينة يبدأ من الألف الثاني قبل الميلاد. كانت دمشق جزءًا من مقاطعة آمورو القديمة في عهد مملكة الهكسوس، ما بين 1720-1570 قبل الميلاد، وتذكر بعض السجلات المصرية القديمة من رسائل تل العمارنة حوالي 1350 قبل الميلاد، أنها كانت تسمى في ذلك العهد ديماسكو، وأنها تحت سيطرة ملك مصر القديمة بيرياوازا. حوالي عام 1260 قبل الميلاد، أصبحت دمشق فضلا عن بقية البلاد، ساحة معركة بين الحيثيين من الشمال والمصريين من الجنوب، وانتهت المعركة بتوقيع معاهدة بين هاتوسيلي الثالث ورمسيس الثاني، والتي سلمت مقاليد السيطرة على منطقة دمشق لرمسيس الثاني عام 1259 قبل الميلاد. وحوالي 1200 قبل الميلاد، وصلت شعوب البحر إلى دمشق، ما وضع علامة على نهاية العصر البرونزي في المنطقة ودخول العصر الحديدي؛ والذي لم تكن دمشق فيه، في الجزء الطرفي في الصورة، بل أثرت على عدد من المراكز السكانية في سوريا القديمة.

في سوريا الآرامية
يعود ظهور دمشق كمدينة على جانب من الأهمية إلى فترة سوريا الآرامية حوالي القرن الثاني عشر قبل الميلاد؛ إذ أسس الآراميون سلسلة ممالك متحالفة مع بعضها البعض كانت آرام دمشق المذكورة في الكتاب المقدس إحداها؛ ويعود لتلك الفترة اكتساب دمشق لأقدم أشكال اسمها الحالي ديماشقو. أنشأ الآراميون نظام توزيع للمياه، وبنوا الترع وقنوات الري على أطراف نهر بردى، وهو ما ساهم بازدهار الزراعة وزيادة عدد السكان، خصوصًا من ناحية وفود قبائل آرام زوبة من سهل البقاع المجاور لدمشق، واستقرارهم في المدينة، وهو ما جعل دمشق تابعة لمركزهم في البقاع، حتى القرن العاشر قبل الميلاد، حين تمكّن إيزرون عام 965 قبل الميلاد من الإطاحة بـآرام زوبة مؤسسًا الكيان المستقل المعروف بآرام دمشق؛ التي بزرت كالقوة المتفوقة في جنوب سوريا الآرامية، وسعت للتوسع واحتكار طرق التجارة مع الشرق، وحاربت مملكة إسرائيل، لاسيّما في عهد بن حدد الأول (880 - 841 قبل الميلاد)، وفي عهد خلفه حزائيل غدت باشان المعروفة اليوم باسم حوران إلى مملكته؛ إلا أن بن حدد الثاني فشل في حصار السامرة ووقع في الأسر، ما اضطره إلى فتح المجال التجاري لليهود في دمشق؛ بكل الأحوال فإن التهديد الذي شكلته الإمبراطورية الآشورية كان أحد أهم أسباب عقد معاهدة السلام بين آرام دمشق ومملكة إسرائيل، لمواجهة الخطر المشترك على كليهما.
في عام 853 قبل الميلاد، قام الملك هدادايزر من دمشق بقيادة تحالف سوريا الآرامية، وقد شمل هذا التحالف قوات من شمال مملكة حماة، والقوات التي وفرها أحاب ملك إسرائيل؛ واحتدم القتال في معركة قرقر ضد الجيش الآشوري، والذي انتهى بانتصار التحالف الآرامي. قتل هدادايزر على يد خليفته حزائيل الثاني، وإنهار التحالف المعقود مع مملكة إسرائيل، فحاولت آرام دمشق غزوا مملكة إسرائيل مجددًا لكن الغزو الآشوري الثاني أفضى لإلغاء الخطة. أمر حزائيل الثاني بالتراجع إلى الجزء المحصن من دمشق، في حين نهب الآشوريون ما تبقى من المملكة، إلا أنهم فشلوا من دخول مدينة دمشق ذاتها، معلنين سيادتهم على حوران والبقاع. وبحلول القرن الثامن قبل الميلاد، تمكنت الإمبراطورية الآشورية من الاستيلاء على جميع الممالك الآرامية في سوريا بما فيها دمشق؛ وبالرغم من الاضطرابات السياسية والثورات التي شهدتها هذه الفترة، إلا أن المدينة اشتهرت كمركز تجاري وثقافي في سوريا الآرامية؛ كما ازدهرت كموقع للقوافل التجارية نحو الشرق والجنوب؛ ولم تضمحل اللغة أو الثقافة الآرامية بل انتشرت نحو الأجزاء الشرقية من الهلال الخصيب؛ وبحلول سنة 605 قبل الميلاد اضمحلت السيطرة الآشورية بعد سقوط نينوى بيد الميديين والبابليين، الذين ورثوا حكم سوريا، التي أضحت أو بعض أجزائها على الأقل ومنها دمشق ضمن نطاق سيطرة الفرعون نخاو الثاني، لفترة وجيزة، إلا أن الإمبراطورية البابلية الثانية تمكنت من استعادتها بعد فترة قصيرة. وأصبحت المدينة لاحقا بعد صعود الأخمينيين جزأ من إمبراطوريتهم.

في سوريا الأنتيكية
لحوالي الألف عام وبدءًا من 331 قبل الميلاد، كانت دمشق جزءًا من سوريا الأنتيكية، أساسًا عبر حكمي الدولة السلوقية ثم ولاية سوريا الرومانية؛ وخلال بعض الفترات كانت دمشق جزءًا من ممالك الحكم الذاتي السورية، كدولة الأنباط في القرن الأول، ومملكة تدمر في القرن الثالث، ويذكر أن سكان دمشق استنجدوا بالملك النبطي الحارث الثالث عام 84 لحمايتهم من قطاع الطرق، وبذلك بلغت الدولة النبطية أقصى اتساعها. واكتسبت دمشق وضع مدينة حرّة، وهو ما كان يعفيها من الضرائب ويشجّع فيها التجارة، وشكلت حلف المدن العشر أو «الديكابوليس» بدءًا من القرن الأول قبل الميلاد؛ ومنحت في عهد الإمبراطور هادريان وضح متروبول أي مدينة كبرى، وإن لم تكن مركزًا لولاية حتى عام 400 حين قسّم البيزنطيون البلاد إلى أربعة ولايات، والتي كانت دمشق بموجبها عاصمة ولاية فينيقيا الثانية. ولعلّ أكبر كارثة حلّت بالمدينة، الاجتياح الفارسي عام 614 بقيادة كسرى الثاني، والذي انتهى عام 629 حين تمكن هرقل من طرد الفرس في سوريا.

مكثت دمشق سريانية اللغة والثقافة في العصور الأنتيكية، رغم انتشار اليونانية فيها لاسيّما في الطبقات العليا، ولم تحلّ لغة الانثقاف مكان اللغة الأصلية كما حصل في مناطق عديدة لاسيّما في الساحل، وبرزت من دمشق شخصيات سورية يونانية الثقافة على مستوى الإمبراطورية مثل أبولودور؛ وشهدت دمشق في مرحلة سوريا الأنتيكية، ازدهارًا عمرانيًا، وتخطيطًا على نمط هيبوداموس وتوسعًا، واحتوت كعواصم العالم الإغريقي، مسارح، وساحات لسباق الخيل، وحمامات، وأقواس نصر، ومدافن فخمة، ويعود لتلك الحقبة من تاريخ دمشق، نمو سورها، وأبوابها، ويضيف بعض المؤرخين قلعتها. خلال مرحلة ما قبل الميلاد، انتشرت عبادة الإله الآرامي حدد - وهو المقابل لجوبتير الروماني، وزيوس اليوناني، ضمن سياسة توفيق الآلهة - في المدينة؛ ووصف بكونه سيّد دمشق، وشيّد على اسمه معبد جوبتير؛ ووجدت في دمشق جماعات ضخمة من يهود سوريا من مرحلة قبل الميلاد، وانتشرت فيها المسيحية منذ قرنها الأول، وحسب سفر أعمال الرسل، فإن القديس بولس، تحوّل إلى المسيحية قرب دمشق،أع 9:3] ومنها انطلق في النشاط التبشيري، بعد أن تمّت تدليته في سلة من إحدى نوافذ السور، إذ أراد الحاكم إلقاء القبض عليه وقتله.2كو 11:33]

الخلافة الراشدة والأموية
في سبتمبر 635م فتح خالد بن الوليد دمشق سلمًا بعد ستة أشهر من الحصار، ومنح في إثرها الأمان لسكانها حسب صكّ التسليم المبرم بينه وبين أسقفها سرجون بن منصور؛ وهو الصك الذي استسلمت بموجبه سائر المدن السورية؛ وفي العام التالي (13هـ/636م) وقعت معركة اليرموك الحاسمة في تاريخ فتوح الشام. بعد الفتح استقرّ الولاة في دمشق، وبذلك انتقلت عاصمة البلاد من أنطاكية إليها؛ وبعد أربع سنوات من الفتح عيّن معاوية بن أبي سفيان واليًا على دمشق، خلفًا لأخيه يزيد بن أبي سفيان؛ وخلال فتنة مقتل عثمان أعلن معاوية التمرد على الخليفة علي بن أبي طالب، واستقلّ بحكم الشام، وبسط نفوذه في مصر عبر عامله عمرو بن العاص، وبعد خمس سنوات من القتال، انتهت الحرب في عام الجماعة (40هـ) بإعلان الدولة الأموية وعاصمتها دمشق؛ وبذلك يكون معاوية قد حكم دمشق أربعين عامًا عشرون منها كوالي، وعشرون أخرى كخليفة.

وخلال «الفتنة الثانية» والتي كان قائدها في دمشق يزيد بن معاوية، نقل إلى دمشق رأس الإمام الحسين وعدد من نساء أهل البيت منهم السيدة زينب؛ كما استقر في دمشق عدد من زوجات النبي، والصحابة، ودفنوا فيها. خلال الصراع بين فروع الأسرة الأموية على الحكم وقعت معركة مرج راهط قرب دمشق بين أتباع الأمويين وأتباع عبد الله بن الزبير، والتي ثبتت البيت المرواني وزعيمه مروان بن الحكم في السلطة؛ وفي أعقاب حكمه لا سيّما أيام ابنه عبد الملك، وحفيديه الوليد وهشام، عاشت دمشق أزهى أيامها، فمع توسع الدولة وتدفق أموال الجباية على عاصمتها تكاثرت في دمشق القصور والحمامات وغيرها من المباني والمحال العامة، ويروي المؤرخون أن الناس إذا التقوا بعضهم في أيّام الوليد وهشام، كان حديثهم عن العمارة، وفنون البناء، ومجمل ما يمكن استنتاجه من خلال مصادر المؤرّخين، أن مدينة دمشق في العهد الأموي كانت تحفل بحلّة جميلة بعد أن نعمت بالمركز الممتاز، والخير العميم، والازدهار الاقتصادي، ويحدّث المؤرخون عن أحواض المياه والنواعير والسّقايات التي كانت منبّثة على أطراف الشوارع، وعلى أبواب المباني العامّة، وفي الأسواق والسّاحات، وعند أبواب المدينة، ولقد عدّد ابن عساكر عشرين منها كانت باقية إلى عهده يرجع أكثرها إلى عصر بني أميّة؛ ولعلّ «دار الإمارة» التي شيدها معاوية لتكون مقرًا له والتي سميت أيضًا «الدار الخضراء» نظرًا لقبتها الخضراء، إحدى أول وأبرز المشاهد العمرانية الأمويّة في المدينة، كما شيّد الأمويون مستشفيان كبيران داخل المدينة ودارًا للخيول.
وبنى الوليد الجامع الأموي وأسرف في تزينه بالفسيفساء، وكذلك الحال في حلب، وكان الجامع الأموي مسجد دمشق الوحيد داخل الأسوار إلى جانب مصليين صغيرين خارجها، ولم يبن الأمويون سواهم. ونتيجة هذا الازدهار استقر حولها على ضفاف نهر بردى عدد من القبائل، وشقّ «نهر يزيد» من نهر بردى لتأمين الريّ لمساحة أكبر من الأراضي؛ كما اهتمّ الوليد أيضًا بالطرقات وربط المدن بعضها ببعض لا سيّما بين دمشق والبادية، حيث شيّد الأمويون ما يزيد عن عشرين قصرًا للتنزه وممارسة الرياضات المختلفة، وشهدت المدينة بالتزامن مع ذلك نهضة ثقافيّة. وبعد وفاة هشام أصيبت الدولة بالتصدع، وتعاقب عليها ضعاف الخلفاء، واندلعت فيها فتن دامية بين العرب من القيسية واليمنية، وخلع البيت الأموي نفسه خليفتين، ونقل مروان بن محمد آخر الأمويين، عاصمته إلى حران، ولم يتوقف تداعي صرح الدولة في عهده، وبختام العصر الأمويّ زال عهد دمشق الذهبي.

الخلافة العباسية
تابعت قوات الثورة العباسية تقدمها في أملاك الدولة بعد انتصارها على الأمويين في معركة الزاب عام 749م، حتى فرضت حصارًا على دمشق دام شهرًا ونصف الشهر، ثم تمكّن المحاصِرون من نقب السور عند باب الصغير، وفتحت المدينة للعباسيين، الذين ارتكبوا فيها قسطًا وافرًا من عمليات القتل، والنهب، والتدمير، وقد ذكرها مؤرخو تلك الفترة ومنهم المقدسي. وقد أهملت المدينة في العصر العباسي الاول، ولم تول أية أهمية، وشهدت عدة ثورات ضد الولاة العباسيين، منها ثورة عثمان الأزدي عام 753، وثورة 850 ضد المتوكل على الله لما مارسه واليها من «استذلال» لأهلها، ثم عام 868 بقيادة عيسى بن الشيخ الذي أعلنها دولة مستقلة استمرت حتى عام 896، حيث كلف المعتمد على الله أماجور التركي بالقضاء على دولة عيسى بن الشيخ، وهو ما تمّ له فعلاً. كذلك فقد اندلعت فتن وحروب أهلية بين القيسية واليمانية داخل المدينة بين 792 - 796، وفي عام 802 أيضًا. ويذكر أنّ المتوكل على الله أراد نقل حاضرة الخلافة من سامراء إلى دمشق، وكتب لواليه فيها بذلك، غير أنه لم يمكث فيها سوى شهرين وعاد إلى سامراء تحت ضغط رجال دولته الأتراك. ولم يترك العباسيون أثرًا معماريًا هامًا في المدينة باستثناء ما ذهب إليه عدد من المؤرخين بأن قبة الخزنة في الجامع الأموي إنما بنيت في خلافة محمد المهدي عام 774.

خلال القرن العاشر الذي تميّز بضعف الدولة في بغداد، وانتشار الدويلات المستقلة في أرباضها، تتالى على حكم دمشق الطولونيون حتى عام 906، ثم الإخشيديون، وتعرضت المدينة في عهدهم لغارات شنها القرامطة والبيزنطيون؛ وتلا الإخشيد الحمدانيون 968 حين استعادها الإخشيد مجددًا عام 967، وكانت جزءًا من أملاك خلفائهم الفاطميين حتى 947، حين استنجد أهل دمشق بالقائد التركي أفتكين الذي وصل حمص، فزحف منها إلى دمشق للسيطرة عليها، وقد وقعت اثنتي عشرة معركة بين أفتكين والقائد الفاطمي جوهر، كان آخرها معركة الشاغور، التي خرجت بنتيجتها الشام عن حكم الفاطميين؛ إلا أنهم عادوا بعد فترة قصيرة، وساءت أيام الفاطميين أحوال المعيشة وهجرها السكان بنتيجة الغلاء، فانخفض عدد قاطنيها بشكل كبير، وقامت ثورات أحداث عامي 982 و999، واستمرّ حكم الفاطميين حتى 1075 حين سيطر عليها السلاجقة، بقيادة تتش بن ألب أرسلان ثم ابنه دقاق؛ اهتم السلاجقة بالناحية الدينية في دمشق خصوصًا إثر انتشار المذهب الشيعي في أعقاب سيطرة الفاطميين على المدينة، فأنشؤوا عددًا من المدارس الدينية مجانًا، كما اعتنوا ببناء البيمارستانات، وقد تحولت دمشق إلى دولة سلجوقية مستقلة بعد انفراط عقد الدولة السلجوقية الموحدة إلى مجموعة من الدول المسيطرة على المدن الكبرى في الشام.

بعد نجاح الحملة الصليبية الأولى في تأسيس إمارات لها في الساحل الشامي، بلغت حدود مملكة بيت المقدس أطراف دمشق الجنوبية في الجولان، وتعرضت حوران لغارات عديدة من قبلهم، وهو ما هدد أمن دمشق واقتصادها، لكون حوران مصدر قمحها؛ وأبرمت دمشق السلجوقية عام 1110 هدنة مع مملكة بيت المقدس، وفي 1129 اتهم السلاجقة الإسماعيليون بالخيانة وقتل 6,000 إسماعيلي من سكان المدينة مع قادتهم؛ وشهد عام 1132 انتقام الإسماعيلية باغتيال تاج الدين البوري، حاكم دمشق السلجوقي؛ واستغلّ صليبيو القدس الوضع مجهزين جيشًا من 60,000 جندي للهجوم على المدينة، فقام تاج الدين بوري بالتحالف مع عماد الدين زنكي بهدف منع تقدم الجيش وهو ما نجح في تحقيقه؛ وفي عام 1148 ضربت الحملة الصليبية الثانية حصارًا حول دمشق إلا أنه باء بالفشل بجهود نور الدين زنكي حاكم حلب، الذي عاد فخلع السلاجقة عام 1154 موحدًا سوريا تحت حكمه؛ وبعد وفاة نور الدين واندثار الدولة الزنكية، تبعت دمشق حكم صلاح الدين والدولة الأيوبية التي شملت في عهده الشام، ومصر، والحجاز، واليمن؛ إلا أنه بعد وفاته عام 1193 انقسمت دولته بين الورثة، فكانت دمشق دولة أيوبية مستقلة بين 1193 - 1201، و1218 - 1245، و1250 - 1260. خلال فترة الحروب الصليبية، اكتسبت دمشق سمعة كبيرة لدى الصليبيين، فالحرير والخشب المزخرف والمطعم وغيرها من سلع الرفاهية إنما كانت تنقل عبر دمشق ومنها إلى أوروبا.

عهد السلطنة المملوكية
اعتبر المماليك الذين حكموا البلاد بدءًا من 1250 دمشق ثاني مدنهم بعد القاهرة لموقعها الحربي وغنى أراضيها؛ واعتبروها مركز نيابة بلاد الشام. وتتالت على دمشق في القرن الثالث عشر غزوات المغول المتلاحقة، وأشدها «غزوة غازان» التي وقعت في عام 1300، وقد بلغ عدد قتلى سكان المدينة حوالي مائة ألف شخص حسب ما نقل عن قدماء المؤرخين، إلى جانب إحراق مكتباتها وأسواقها، غير أنهم فشلوا في اقتحام قلعتها لمناعة موقعها وحصانة سورها المزدوج، فخرجوا من المدينة وأعيدت الخطبة لسلطان مصر.

وفي عام 1402، قام المغول بحملة ثانية على دمشق بقيادة تيمورلنك، وقد أحرقت المدينة بما فيها الجامع الأموي، وسُبي منها بنتيجة الحملة عدد وافر من الصنّاع والحرفيين والعلماء إلى سمرقند، فساهموا بنهضتها الثقافية. وفي عهد السلطان برسباي (1422 - 1438) أصيبت بلاد الشام بدءًا من حلب وانتهاءً بالكرك بوباء مجاعة، حتى مات الناس من الجوع أو من الطاعون، ولعلّ عدم إيلاء المماليك للزراعة الاهتمام الكافي من ساهم في انتشاره، ويقول نقولا زيادة أنه لو لم تكن دمشق غزيرة المياه وخصبة الأراضي لما عادت إليها الحياة المزدهرة بسرعة ما كان، على أن المماليك لم يهملوا الزراعة فحسب بل الأمن أيضًا وباستثناء قلعة دمشق التي يتولى شؤون حراستها حامية معينة من القاهرة، فإن أحياء دمشق وحاراتها كانت معرضة لغزو البدو وقطاع الطرق، هذا ما دفع أهالي الأحياء لتسليح أنفسهم وتنظيم فرق من أهالي الحيْ تتولى الدفاع عن الحي، ثم أصبح لهذه القوى من الأمن ذاتي ما يشبه نقابات خاصة؛ كذلك فقد حُصر بآل السيوفي منصب شيخ المدينة، يتناقله أعضائها بالوراثة، ومن مهام شيخ المدينة تمثيل الأهالي ومطالبهم أمام الوالي، والتوسط لهم في القضايا المختلفة. رغم ذلك فإن عدد سكان المدينة كان ينمو باطراد وحينها كان حي الصالحية أكبرها، إضافة إلى ظهور أحياء جديدة وضواحي على أطرافها، وإلى جانب النمو الديموغرافي فإن نموًا اقتصاديًا شهدته المدينة خلال القرنين الرابع عشر والخامس عشر، وقامت عدد من الأسواق كسوق الدباغين وسوق الخيل وسوق ساروجة الذي كان أكبرها وأسرعها نموًا. وقد اهتم المماليك بتأسيس المدارس الشرعية الإسلامية ومنها المدرسة الظاهرية التي اشتهرت بزخرفتها، وأداروا ستة مستشفيات كبيرة تعرف باسم «البيمارستان» خلال مدة حكمهم، ومنذ القرن الخامس عشر غدت دمشق مركزًا هامًا للصوفيين، وقد برز من المدينة خلال حكم المماليك عدد من الشعراء والمؤرخين والفقهاء وغيرهم.

في سوريا العثمانية
أوليت دمشق أهمية خاصة خلال زمن الدولة العثمانية ولقبت «بالشام الشريف»؛ وبعد معركة مرج دابق، دخل السلطان سليم الأول دمشق يوم 26 سبتمبر 1516، وكان أول أعماله ترميم الجامع الأموي؛ وقضى السلطان سليم في دمشق فترتين الأولى عام 1516، والثانية بعد عودته من مصر عام 1517، حيث أنفق معظمها في تنظيم الشؤون الإدارية للولاية، وفي عام 1524 ثارت دمشق بقيادة واليها جان بردي الغزالي، وانضمت إليها مدن أخرى كحمص وحماه، فسار فرحات باشا والي حلب بأمر من سليمان القانوني إليها، فقضى على التمرد قبل امتداده.
بين العصرين المملوكي والعثماني استمرت الكتابة في مصنفات تربية الأطفال وتأديبهم، ونذكر من مصنفات تلك الحقبة ابن حجر الهيتمي (974-909هـ/1566 – 1503 م) الذي وضع وهو في مكة مصنفه الشهير"تحرير المقال في آداب وأحكام وفوائد يحتاج إليها مؤدبو الأطفال. ويبين الهيتمي في مؤلفه هذا ما يحتاج إليه مؤدبو الأطفال من المعارف المتصلة بالتربية، ويعرض لأهم المبادئ التربوية التي توجه عمل المؤدبين في دور العلم.
ووقف المؤرخون الدمشقيون اللاحقون (م1546) أمام انتشار ظاهرة فساد الأخلاق في فترة القرن الذي سبقهم، والتي كانت محل استهجان ورفض ونقد لموقف السلطة السياسية منها، وبخاصة فيما يتصل بارتكاب الفواحش والجهر بها من شرب الخمر، وممارسة اللواط، وانتشار بنات الهوى في الأسواق.
ويكشف ابن طولون الصالحي (ت:953هـ/1546م) بأن لبنات الهوى بيوتاً خاصة بهن؛ إذ يذكر في أحداث شهر جمادى الأولى سنة 885هـ/ تموز 1480م أنه تم تخريب «..بيوت بنات الخطأ بين جامع التوبة وجامع الجديد بعد أن اشتريت القيسارية من ابن الصقر التاجر بمبلغ ثلاثين أشرفية، ثم انتقلت بنات الخطأ إلى جوار المدرسة اليونسية بالشرف الأعلى» 
غير أن اهتمام العثمانيين بالمدينة لم ينقص، فشيّدوا التكية السليمانية، ورمموا حي الصالحية، الذين لا يزالا ماثلين إلى اليوم، كأحد منجزات العثمانيين المعمارية المبكرة في سوريا، ولم يكن استقرار الولاة من شيم العهد العثماني، وهكذا تعاقب على دمشق في 148 سنة الأولى من حكم العثمانيين فيها ما لا يقلّ عن 138 واليًا ولم يدم منهم في وظيفته مدة سنتين إلا ثلاثة وثلاثون واليا؛ وبين عامي 1815 و1895 توالى 61 والي بمعدل والي في كل سنة ونصف. وكان الولاة دائمي النزاع مع الولايات المجاورة، فعلى سبيل المثال نشبت الحرب بين والي دمشق ووالي طرابلس الشام بين عامي 1664 و1667.

أصبحت دمشق ميناءً بريًا للقوافل التجارية بين مختلف مناطق الدولة، وحسب شهادة الرحالة الفرنسي لوران دارفيو في القرن السابع عشر، فإن سكّان دمشق يحبون العيش برفاهة واقتناء الآثاث الفاخر، وأن منازل المدينة توحي بالعظمة لروعتها، أما فيما يخصّ التجارة فقد كتب درافيو أن دمشق واحدة من الأسواق الرئيسية في الدولة العثمانية فهي محط القوافل التجارية القادمة من مكة والهند وبلاد فارس محمّلة بمختلف السلع، ومكان لصناعة الأقمشة التي اشتهرت بها المدينة. وإلى جانب القوافل التجاريّة، فإن المدينة والتي كانت نقطة تجمّع لقوافل الحجاج المسلمين، قد اعتمدت على قوافل الحج في تأمين الوفرة النقدية وتنشيط عمليات البيع والشراء. لسوء الحظ، فإن قوافل الحج في أواسط القرن الثامن عشر قد تعرضت لهجمات من قبل البدو أو من قبل مقاتلي الحركة الوهابية وفشل الولاة المتعاقبون في الغالب في تأمين الحجيج ولعلّ أكبر الحوادث ما وقع عام 1757 حين نهبت القافلة التي كانت تحوي ستين ألف حاج بكامل ما تحمل. ونتيجة انعدام الأمن خلال تلك المرحلة انخفض عدد الحجاج إلى نحو ألفي حاج فقط ما أثر على اقتصاد دمشق بشكل بالغ السوء.
في عام 1724 أسندت ولاية دمشق إلى إسماعيل باشا العظم وهو «خير وال عرفته المدينة في العصر العثماني»، وله يعود تشيييد قصر العظم الذي اعتبره فيليب حتي «أروع أثر عربي في القرن الثامن عشر»، وفي عام 1771 دخلت المدينة في حوزة والي عكا ضاهر العمر إلا أنه اضطر للتنازل عنها سلمًا في العام التالي. وفي عام 1782 غدا أحمد باشا الجزار واليًا وكان حكمه قاسيًا إذ أضنك الشعب بالضرائب وضاعف من الأتاوة على التجار، وأصيبت دمشق وغوطتها بالقحط والجفاف عام 1793، وحين أعيد تعيينه واليًا عام 1803 أغلق أهل دمشق باب المدينة في وجه مندوبه سليمان باشا، ولذلك فرض عليهم غرامات طائلة وصادر أملاكهم ومكث واليًا إلى أن توفي عام 1804 قبل أن يعود الولاة العثمانيين المتعاقبين على تسيير شؤونها.

وفي فبراير 1831 ثارت دمشق بعد إعلان الوالي ضريبة جديدة اعتبرها السكان باهظة، وشكّل أهالي حي الميدان ذي الغالبية الفقيرة نواة المنتفضين، الذين قاموا بمحاصرة الوالي وكبار حاشيته في القلعة، ثم اقتحموها قاتلين الوالي وكبار حاشيته، وساحلين جثته جارين إياها من حي إلى حي في شوارع دمشق.
وفي العام نفسه، دخل إبراهيم باشا دمشق سلمًا باسم والده والي مصر محمد علي باشا، وكان حكم إبراهيم باشا في الشام إصلاحيًا من مختلف الجوانب، رغم الفترة القصيرة التي مكث بها في السلطة، إذ اضطر للانسحاب بضغط القوى الكبرى العسكري في 17 سبتمبر 1840. في عام 1845 نهب البدو قافلة تجار دمشق المتوجهة إلى بغداد وكانت مكونة من ثلاثة آلاف جمل فأفلس تجار المدينة وأصبحت طريق التجارة مع بغداد تمرّ بحلب والموصل أي أطول مما كانت عليه بثلاث مرات، وفي عام 1851 طبّق نظام التجنيد الإجباري للمرة الأولى بعد سقوط حكم محمد علي مع ما تركه من آثار سلبية تمثلت بالهجرة الداخليّة والخارجيّة على حد سواء وتراجع الاقتصاد وقسمة العائلات للحصول على إعفاء الرجل الوحيد؛ وشهدت دمشق مجازر 1860 التي أفضت لقتل آلاف المسيحيين؛ على أنّ الهزيع الأخير من القرن التاسع عشر كان عهد نهضة، لاسيّما في عهود الولاة المصلحين أمثال مدحت باشا، وغدت دمشق خلال تلك الفترة، إحدى ميادين النهضة العربية وتأسست بها صحف ومجلات، وانتشرت المدارس وأسست نواة الجامعة السورية، والجمعيات السياسية، والمسرح برعاية أبو خليل القباني، وتزايدت الآثار العمرانية وشقت ساحات المدينة البازرة أمثال ساحة المرجة فضلاً عن انطلاق سكة حديد الحجاز والاتصال بالتلغراف معها.

دمشق المعاصرة
عانت دمشق خلال الحرب العالمية الأولى من ضنك العيش بنتيجة المجاعة التي اجتاحت البلاد وموجات الهجرة، فضلاً عن كونها مقر الجيش العثماني الخامس، وتعسّف الحاكم العسكري جمال باشا السفّاح، الذي أسس ديوانًا للأحكام العرفية فيها، وبلغ ذروة قرارته بإعدام سبعة من وجهاء المدينة في 6 مايو 1916 وهو ما تحوّل إلى عيد للشهداء. في 30 سبتمبر 1918 انسحبت القوات العثمانية والوالي العثماني من دمشق مؤذنًة بانتهاء عصر سوريا العثمانية. وفي اليوم التالي وصلتها قوات من جيش الثورة العربية الكبرى، وبعدها بأيام فيصل بن الحسين، الذي نصّب في دمشق يوم 8 آذار/مارس 1920 ملكًا على سوريا (التي كانت تعني كامل بلاد الشام) خلال حفل إعلان الاستقلال وإنشاء المملكة السورية العربية. غير أن عهد الاستقلال لم يستمرّ طويلاً، إذ دخلت القوات الفرنسية دمشق بعد معركة ميسلون في 24 يوليو 1920، وفي سبتمبر أعلنت دولة دمشق المصغّرة ضمن خطة الانتداب الفرنسي لتقسيم سوريا إلى دويلات. في عام 1922 نقلت عاصمة البلاد إلى حمص ضمن الاتحاد السوري، على أن تبقى دمشق عاصمة إقليم دمشق فقط، وهو ما ألغي عام 1925 بعودة دمشق عاصمة الدولة السورية.
عام 1925 وصلت الثورة السورية الكبرى إلى دمشق، وتحولت الغوطة إلى إحدى معاقلها الرئيسية، ولعلّ أبرز مرحلة في تلك الفترة أحداث 18 أكتوبر حين استولى الثوار على أحياء الميدان والشاغور ووصلوا حتى سوق البزورية وقصر العظم مقر مندوبي المفوضيّة الفرنسيّة العليا، وطردوا جميع عناصر الشرطة واستطاعوا الاستيلاء على ما فيها من أسلحة، وبلغ التماس ساحة المرجة، إلا أن قصف المدينة بالمدفعية الثقيلة من قاسيون أجبر المقتحمين على الانسحاب. في 1936 كانت دمشق شرارة الإضراب الستيني، وبعدها انطلقت منها احتجاجات 1939، التي أفضت لنزول وحدات الجيش الفرنسي السنغالية واحتلالها ساحات المدينة. خلال الحرب العالمية الثانية، نشبت معركة دمشق عام 1941 والتي أفضت لسيطرة الحلفاء ممثلين بالجيش البريطاني وقوات فرنسا الحرة على المدينة. بعد نهاية الحرب العالمية الثانية، اندلعت من دمشق انتفاضة الاستقلال التي شهدت قصف دمشق للمرة الثانية، ونزول قوات بريطانية فيها، وبشكل عام أدت الانتفاضة لنيل الجلاء. بعد الاستقلال كانت دمشق مسرحًا لعدد من الانقلابات العسكرية أهمها انقلاب آذار 1949 وانقلاب 1954، الذي انطلق من حلب وأدى إلى حالة فوضى في دمشق لمدة يومين تخللتها عمليات سلب ونهب. وكرد فعل على حرب فلسطين وإنشاء إسرائيل، شهدت المدينة عام 1948 احتجاجات ومظاهرات تعرضت خلالها مواقع لليهود في المدينة وعدد من مقار البعثات الدبلوماسية، بما فيها مقر الأمم المتحدة، لعمليات نهب واعتداء، وكان أكبر هذه الاعتداءات تفجير كنيس المنشارة. خلال تمرد الإخوان المسلمين في الثمانينات، وقعت في دمشق عدة تفجيرات بين 1981 - 1986، واستهدافات بالسيارات المفخخة كان أكبرها تفجير الأزبكية. تأثرت المدينة بالصراع مع إسرائيل، فتعرضت دمشق الكبرى لاستهدافات صهيونية في أزمنة الحرب، مثل حرب حزيران 1967، وخارج أزمنة الحرب مثل اغتيال عماد مغنية عام 2008 وقصف مركز البحوث العلمية في جمرايا مرتين في 2013.
تطورت المدينة على صعيد الخدمات والتخطيط العمراني وزادت المرافق العامة وغدت أكثر حداثة، وبرزت المشاريع المعمارية الضخمة فيها؛ كما أفضت الهجرة من الريف إلى المدينة والنزوح من الجولان وفلسطين إلى نشوء ضواحٍ سكنية ملحقة بدمشق مثل مخيم اليرموك والحجر الأسود.

الثورة السورية
اندلعت الأزمة السورية في مارس 2011، وشهدت دمشق احتجاجات سلمية لمدَّة سنة كاملة، قابلها النظام بعنف مفرط، ممَّا أنشأ أنواع مختلفة من الاحتجاجات المعارضة، التي تحولت إلى نزاع مسلح مع النظام؛ في 6 يناير 2012 انفجرت أول سيارة مفخخة في دمشق ما أسفر عن مقتل 26 شخصًا؛ وتكررت عمليات الاستهداف فيما بعد ولعلّ عملية بركان دمشق وزلزال سوريا، التي استهدفت قيادات بارزة في النظام، أهم عملية تفجير داخل المدينة. أيضًا، فإن المعارك الحربية، احتدمت في مناطق ريف دمشق، عازلةً المدينة عن أجزاء واسعة من ريفها، وعن بعض ضواحيها، وأفضت لحركة نزوح واسعة إلى المدينة؛ وبشكل عام تكررت الاشتباكات والمعارك في ريف دمشق وبعض ضواحي المدينة نفسها كمخيم اليرموك، وكذلك الاستهدافات بالسيارات المفخخة، وبقذائف الهاون والصواريخ، ما بعد مرحلة تحول الأزمة إلى صيغة العسكرة الكاملة؛ في حين عانت المدينة من الغلاء، وانقطاع الطرق، وانتشار الحواجز الأمنية بشكل كثيف إضافة إلى نزوح الآلاف من المناطق المحيطة بدمشق إلى المناطق الأمنة.

الجغرافيا
التشكل الجيولوجي
بدأ تشكل المنطقة التي تحتلها دمشق حاليًا منذ العصر الطباشيري، وتشير المعلومات المتوافرة أنه مع بداية الزمن الرابع كانت تغطي المنطقة بحيرة واسعة امتدت من الكسوة حتى الضمير، وكانت شواطئها أعلى من شواطئ بحيرة العتيبة الحالية بحوالي 125 مترًا، ويقوم نهر بردى ونهر الأعوج برفدها بالمياه باستمرار إضافة إلى الأمطار والأودية الفرعية والأنهار الموسمية الأخرى، ما أدى إلى قيام مناخ بارد وماطر وانتشار غابات كثيفة. منذ حوالي 500,000 سنة حصل جفاف نسبي في المناخ فتراجعت مياه البحيرة حتى بلغ ارتفاعها 15 مترًا فقط، وأدى تراجعها إلى تشكل تربة غوطة دمشق ومنطقة التربة السوداء الخصبتين نتيجة جملة نشاطات سيلية حتية، ولم يبق من هذه البحيرة سوى بحيرة العتيبة حاليًا، مع العلم أنه قبل حوالي 10,000 سنة حصل جفاف مناخي آخر أدى إلى تراجع مستوى ما تبقى من البحيرة لحدود 6 أمتار فقط.

الموقع
دمشق مدينة داخلية تبعد حوالي 80كم عن البحر الأبيض المتوسط قبالة سلسلة جبال لبنان الشرقية، وتقع على هضبة بارتفاع 690م عن سطح البحر، وتبعد عنها بيروت 85 كم إلى الغرب، وكل من عمان 180 كم والقدس 220 كم إلى الجنوب. وقد نوّه الجغرافيون والرحالة لحسن موقعها منذ القديم، حيث أن المياه المتوفرة بكثرة من الأنهار والينابيع والتربة الخصبة والمناخ المعتدل، ساهمت في عمران المدينة وازدهارها؛ ومما قاله فيها ابن حوقل: «هي أجمل مدينة من مدن الشام تقع في أرض مستوية.» تمتد المدينة من السفح الجنوبي لجبل قاسيون نحو الشرق إلى البادية وتحيط بها الغوطة من جميع الجهات، فهي قائمة في وسط الغوطة. كانت البساتين الخصبة سبب وجود دمشق الأساسي وغناها عبر العصور، مرتوية من فروع نهري بردى في الشمال، والأعوج في الجنوب، وكلاهما شديدي التشعب في سواقٍ تغطي المدينة والغوطة أيضًا. يتغذى كلا النهرين من ذوبان ثلوج سلسلة لبنان الشرقية، لاسيّما جبل الشيخ، الذي اكتسب اسمه لكونه مجللاً دومًا بالثلج الأبيض. يشكل جبل الشيخ أيضًا، مع سلسلته الجبلية، النهاية والحد لسهول دمشق الخصبة من ناحية الغرب. أما الجبل المحيط بالمدينة بحد ذاتها من ناحية الغرب أيضًا ليشكل «إسورة دمشق» فهو جبل قاسيون، الذي تبلغ أعلى قممه 1170 م فوق سطح البحر، ويعدّ أحد مراكز المدينة السياحية الهامة.
تبلغ مساحة المدينة 105 كم2 بما فيها العمران المنتشر على جبل قاسيون، أما من دون احتساب العمران المنتشر على الجبل فتبلغ مساحتها 77 كم2.

الأحياء والمناطق
تعدّ المدينة القديمة أساس دمشق التاريخي، وهو ذات سور وعشرة أبواب تاريخية، وينصّفها الشارع الشارع المستقيم على نسق العمارة الرومانية، وتحوي عددًا من المعالم البارزة مثل القلعة، والجامع الأموي، وقصر العظم، وقصر الخضراء، وعدد من الأسواق التقليدية؛ والكثير من النمط العماري المعروف باسم البيوت العربية، وتعدّ من أهم معالم سوريا السياحية، وهي مدرجة على لائحة التراث العالمي منذ 1979. خارج المدينة القديمة، بدأت الأحياء بالنشوء منذ القرن الثالث عشر مع ساروجة، والشاغور، والميدان، وتابعت نموّها حتى القسم الثاني من القرن العشرين، فزحف العمران نحو سفوح قاسيون وبساتين الغوطة؛ في المحصلة فإنّ بلدات مستقلة عن دمشق باتت تعدّ جزءًا من المدينة، مثل برزة، وجوبر، والمزة، فضلاً عن الإنشاءات السكنية الحديثة مثل مشروع دمر، وكفر سوسة؛ في الآونة الراهنة تقسّم دمشق إلى 15 منطقة، تقسم هذه الأحياء بدورها إلى 95 حيًا، أما تاريخيًا فحتى بداية القرن العشرين كان التقسيم التقليدي لدمشق، يجعلها في ثمانية أثمان. بكل الأحوال، وبنتيجة توّسع المدينة، فهي ملتصقة بضواحيها، التي تتبع إداريًا محافظة ريف دمشق، بعض هذه التوسعات إنشاءات حديثة مثل جرمانا وأشرفية صحنايا، والبعض الآخر بلدات تاريخية مثل عربين، ودوما؛ يذكر أن عدد من أهالي دمشق انتقل من المدينة إلى الضواحي، لكون تكلفة الحياة وأسعار العقارات فيها أقل، ومن الشائع - كما في عدد كبير من مناطق العالم - أن يكون مكان استقرار الأفراد في المدينة، بينما مركز عملهم في الضواحي، أو العكس. وخلال الأزمة السورية أفضت المعارك والقصف، إلى دمار واسع في عدد كبير من هذه الضواحي، فضلاً عن هجرة معظم سكانها لداخل مدينة دمشق أو مناطق سورية أخرى.

المناخ
مناخ دمشق يتميز بكونه قاريًا جافًا إلى شبه جاف، إذ إن قمم سلسلة جبال لبنان الشرقية تمنع تأثيرات البحر المتوسط من الوصول إلى المدينة، وسوى ذلك فإن انفتاحها من ناحية الشرق والجنوب الشرقي على بادية الشام يجعلها عرضة لتأثيرات مناخية من البادية. أما درجات الحرارة فيبلغ مدى تغيرها خلال العام 18 درجة مئوية، تتجاوز خلال فصل الصيف الأربعين وتنخفض في فصل الشتاء لحوالي سبع درجات، وفي بعض الأوقات لما دون الصفر ما يؤدي إلى إصابة المزروعات بالصقيع فضلاً عن تساقط الثلوج. وعموما لا يتجاوز معدل الهطول المطري السنوي في دمشق بين 200 ملم، وهي غير منتظمة السقوط ما يجعل الاعتماد عليها في الزراعة أمرًا صعبًا، غير أن الروافد المائية وعلى رأسها نهر بردى يغني عن ذلك. أما الرياح التي تهبّ على دمشق فلها نوعان الرياح الغربية والجنوبية الغربية التي تكون محملة بدرجات عالية من الرطوبة، والرياح الشرقية القادمة من البادية التي تهبّ عادة في فصل الصيف مسببة ارتفاعًا في درجات الحرارة وعادة ما تكون محملة بالغبار.

السكان
يَبلغ عدد سكان دمشق وريفها مُجتمعين وفقَ إحصاء عام 2010 حوالي 4.4 ملايين نسمة، مُوزعين كـ1,724 ألف نسمة في محافظة دمشق و2,701 ألف نسمة في محافظة ريف دمشق، و50% من هؤلاء ذكور في دمشق فيما أن نسبتهم تصل إلى حوالي 52% في ريفها، وبذلك يكون عدد سكان دمشق الكبرى أكبر تجمّع بشري في سوريا، ويقطنه حوالي 19.5% من الشعب، كما تعدّ المدينة بذلك أكبر مدن بلاد الشام، والرابعة في الوطن العربي. أما على صعيد مدينة دمشق الإدارية دون ضواحيها، فإنها تحتل المرتبة الثانية في سوريا بعد مدينة حلب، وبفارق ضئيل عن مدينة حمص، وهي المدن المليونية الثلاث في سوريا.
كان مجموع سكان المدينة وريفها قد بلغ حسب إحصاء 2004 حوالي 4 ملايين نسمة، منهم 1.5 مليون في المدينة و2.5 في الريف. وأما في إحصاء 2007 فكان مجموع عدد السكان في المُحافظتين 4.15 ملايين نسمة، حيث احتلَّت ريف دمشق المرتبة الثانية بعد حلب بـ2,487,000 نسمة تليها دمشق في المرتبة الثالثة بـ1,669,000 نسمة، وأما حمص فكانت لا تزال في المرتبة الرَّابعة آنذاك بفارق 22 ألف نسمة عن دمشق. وفيما يخصُّ المستقبل يُتوقع أن يَصل عدد سكان دمشق وحدها بحلول عام 2025 إلى أكثر من 5.6 ملايين نسمة، وأما ريفها فسيَبلغ عدد سكانه 4.6 ملايين نسمة، لكن 80% من الزحف العمراني سيكون باتجاه الريف، وستزداد نسبة الأحياء العشوائية في محيط المدينة. لا يُمكن الحصول على إحصائيات دقيقة للتعداد التاريخي لسكان دمشق، وعُموماً يُوجد الكثير من التضارب في الإحصائيات المسجَّلة. مع تحسُّن الأمن والخدمات الصحية وتوفر الغذاء في فترة النصف الثاني من القرن التاسع عشر والنصف الأول من القرن العشرين، بدأ ازدياد مضطرب في نمو السكان بالنسبة إلى المعدًّلات التاريخية، حيث تضاعف المعدل مرَّات خلال العقود الأخيرة. حسب آخر إحصاء سكاني عام 2010، بلغ عدد سكان المدينة وريفها 4.4 ملايين نسمة.

يَتألف التركيب العرقيُّ لسكان دمشق بشكل أساسي من عرب سوريا الذين يمثلون حوالي 95% من إجمالي السكان، ويَليهم الأكراد بنسبة 4%، وبالإضافة إلى هؤلاء تُوجد أقليَّات أخرى من الأرمن والسريان والتركمان والشركس والأذريين والبشناق والألبان وهم من وفدوا إليها خلال العهد العثماني، تمثل معاً الـ1% المتبقية. الغالبية العُظمى من السكان هي من المسلمين الذي يمثلون 93% من سكان المدينة، تاريخيًا من السُّنَّة، مع هجرة حديثة للمدينة أو ضواحيها من سائر الطوائف. بشكل مميز تعدّ ضاحية الست زينب في الجنوب وحي شارع الأمين ذات أقلية شيعية اثني عشرية معتبرة، وضاحية حرستا (ضاحية الأسد سابقًا) وعش الوروار في الشمال، ذات غالبية علوية. يشكل المسيحيون حوالي 7% من سكان دمشق، وهم يتبعون أساسًا بطريركية أنطاكية وسائر المشرق للروم الأرثوذكس وبطريركية الروم الكاثوليك. بقي في دمشق عدد ضئيل من اليهود، إذ انخفضت أعدادهم بشكل كبير خلال النصف الثاني من القرن العشرين.
عدد الطلاب في دمشق وريفها كبير وهذا يجعل المدينة من «المدن الفتيّة». بلغ عدد المتقدمين في دمشق لامتحانات شهادة التعليم الأساسي والشهادة الثانويّة بمختلف فروعها 64,262 طالبا مقابل 42,994 طالبا في ريفها. تبلغ نسبة الأميّة في المدينة حسب إحصاءات عام 2001 نحو 5.2% من السكان فقط وهي رابع محافظة سورية من حيث القضاء على الأمية، رغم ذلك فإن 33.3% من السكان أي ثلث دمشق حاصلون على التعليم الابتدائي فقط، وطبق الإحصاءات نفسها فإن 6.6% من السكان فقط حاصلون على شهادة جامعيّة؛ علمًا بأن دمشق تحقق أفضل النتائج في البلاد من هذه الناحية. أغلب الطبقات الأميّة والقليلة التعليم هي متقدمة في العُمر بينما تنال أغلب الأجيال الجديدة تعليمًا كاملاً، في حين تبلغ نسبة التسرّب الدراسي 7% من مجموع الطلاب فقط.

الإدارة
حسب المادة الخامسة من دستور سوريا فإن دمشق عاصمة البلاد، وهي بالتالي مقر الحكومة المركزية والهيئات السيادية في الدولة، كالرئاسة، والحكومة، والبرلمان، وأيضًا مقر البعثات الدبلوماسية، وأول قنصلية دبلوماسية افتتحت في دمشق هي قنصلية الكرسي الرسولي عام 1762؛ وتقع غالب مقرات البعثات الأجنبية في مناطق المالكي والمزّة. من ناحية إدارية، فإن دمشق هي محافظة سورية، وهي أصغر المحافظات الأربع عشر من حيث المساحة، والوحيدة التي فصل عنها الريف ومدن الضواحي، لتشكل محافظة أخرى هي محافظة ريف دمشق، ويقع مقرها في حرستا. طبقًا للقانون السوري، يعيّن رئيس الجمهورية المحافظ ويعفيه من منصبه، في حين يقوم ناخبي المحافظة بانتخاب مجلس مدينة لمتابعة تنفيذ القضايا الإدارية اليومية فيها. تقوم فروع دمشق من الهلال الأحمر السوري، والدفاع المدني السوري، والشرطة السورية، بمهام الإسعاف، والإطفاء، والطوارئ، وإدارة المرور، وحفظ الأمن الداخلي في المدينة؛ ويكون للضواحي فروعها الخاصة التابعة لمحافظة ريف دمشق. في مجلس الشعب السوري، تمثل دمشق منذ 1990 بعدد 29 نائبًا، وهو أعلى من حقها في التوزيع في حال توزيع النواب تناسبيًا لأعداد الناخبين بعشرة مقاعد، كما تعدّ دائرة انتخابية واحدة؛ تقليديًا فإن دمشق تنتخب الحزب الوطني خلال مرحلة الجمهورية الأولى، عدا انتخابات 1961 حين حصل الإخوان المسلمون 4 مقاعد مقابل 3 للحزب الوطني ومستقلين لسائر المقاعد، وهي آخر انتخابات تعددية جرت في سوريا، أما جميع الانتخابات اللاحقة خلال عهد الجمهورية الثانية كانت لمرشحي الجبهة الوطنية التقدمية.

الاقتصاد
تقليديًا فإن دمشق مدينة تجارية، ورغم تغيّر طبيعة طرق التجارية من القوافل التقليدية إلى الوسائل الحديثة، فإن دور المدينة كسوق استهلاكية وإنتاجية هامة في سوريا، ومصدرة لمنتجاتها للخارج لاسيّما دول مجلس التعاون لدول الخليج العربية لم يتوقف. منذ 1954 يقام سنويًا معرض دمشق الدولي وقد شاركت به عام 2009 ثمانية وأربعين دولة، ويعدّ أقدم معرض يقام في الشرق الأوسط، إلى جانب عدد من المعارض التخصصية الأقل أهمية. وفي عام 2012 تم وضع أول ميزانية مالية لمحافظة دمشق، حيث وضعت ميزانية قدرها 25 مليار ليرة سورية (حوالي نصف مليار دولار). خُصِّص 10% من الميزانية للمشاريع الطارئة، وتركز الباقي على مشاريع التنمية والخدمات العامة، كشق الطرقات وبناء الجسور وحفر الأنفاق. في عام 2009 افتتح سوق دمشق للأوراق المالية، بوصفه الأول والوحيد في سوريا. كما تحتوي دمشق على عدة نشاطات صناعية، فإلى جانب الصناعات التقليدية، مثل الحلويات الدمشقية، والسيف الدمشقي، والتطعيم بالخزف، والمنسوجات اليدوية بأنواعها، والتي تراجع دورها وأهميتها في العصور الحديثة، فإن ضواحي دمشق تحوي عددًا من المدن الصناعية مثل مدينة حوش بلاس الصناعية ومدينة عدرا، وتحوي مصانع عامّة وخاصة، بشكل خاص لصناعة المواد الغذائية المعتمد على إنتاج الغوطة الزراعي والحيواني، ومواد البناء، والملابس والمنسوجات، والعطور، وبعض الصناعات الثقيلة. أما بالنسبة لسوق العقارات في دمشق فهو مزدهر، وحسب تقرير أعده مستشاري المؤسسة العقارية كوشمان ويكفيلد آند، والذي أفاد أن دمشق تعدّ ثامن أغلى مناطق العالم من حيث سعر المتر المربع في عام 2009.

رغم أن قطاع السياحة قد دمّر بالكامل بنتيجة الأزمة السورية، فإنّ دمشق تعدّ مدينة سياحية بامتياز، ووضعت حسب بعض التصنيفات ضمن قائمة المواقع السياحية الأكثر أهمية في العالم؛ وقد قدّر عدد السيّاح الأجانب في سوريا عام 2010 بنحو 6 ملايين سائح، لتحتل بذلك المرتبة الثالثة في النمو السياحي. نتيجة ذلك، فإن دمشق تحوي جميع عناصر الصناعة السياحية، كالفنادق، وبشكل خاص البيوت العربية التقليدية التي تحولت إلى فنادق في المدينة القديمة، والفنادق الحديثة مثل فندق الفورسيزون وفندق الشام، فضلاً عن المطاعم ومن أشهرها بوابة دمشق، وصالات الرقص والترفيه، والمكاتب السياحية لتنظيم الرحلات إلى المواقع المختلفة.

خدمات
الإعلام
منذ تأسيسهما أواسط القرن العشرين، فإن دمشق مقر الإذاعة والتلفزيون السوري الرسمي، وكذلك الصحف الوطنيّة الثلاث صحيفة تشرين، وصحيفة الثورة، والبعث؛ خلال الفترة الممتدة بين 1963 - 2004 كانت الدولة السورية تحتكر وسائل الإعلام، خارج هذه الفترة وجدت ومنذ 1878 وجدت في دمشق منابر إعلامية خاصة لاسيّما الصحف والمجلات، حاليًا يوجد أكثر من 60 صحيفة ومجلة تصدر في دمشق. تعدّ دمشق أيضًا مقرًا للعديد من الإذاعات والتلفزات الخاصة، مع مكاتب إعلامية دائمة لعدد من القنوات الإقليمية أو الدولية؛ فضلاً عن كونها مقر وكالة الأنباء الرسمية سانا.

التعليم
عام 2005 كانت دمشق تحوي 426 مدرسة حكوميّة ابتدائيّة و81 مدرسة حكوميّة ثانويّة و47 مدرسة حكوميّة مهنيّة، في حين يحوي ريفها 937 مدرسة ابتدائيّة و130 مدرسة ثانوية و81 مدرسة مهنيّة، كانت الدولة السوريّة ومنذ العام 1963 تحتكر القطاع التعليمي بكامل مفاصله، ففي عام 2004 سُمح لقطاع الخاص بالاستثمار في السلك التعليمي وشهدت العاصمة تأسيس عدد وافر من المدارس الخاصة الوطنية أمثال «واحة الشام» أو فروع لمدارس في المنطقة العربية أمثال «مدرسة الشويفات»، على أن الطبقات الثريّة في المجتمع وحدها من تتجه نحو المدارس الخاصة بسبب أقساطها المرتفعة وغير المتلائمة مع متوسط دخل المواطن. في عام 1913، أنشئت أول جامعة بالمفهوم المعاصر في دمشق وهي «مدرسة الحقوق» التي أنشئت أواخر العهد العثماني، وشكلت نواة «الجامعة السوريّة» التي أنشأت في عهد صبحي بركات عام 1923، وحوّل اسمها لاحقًا إلى جامعة دمشق، وهي مدارة من قبل الحكومة السوريّة ويبلغ عدد الكليات التابعة لها 16 كلية و11 معهد عالي؛ ويبلغ عدد الطلاب فيها 115,256 طالب بموجب إحصاءات العام 2007؛ إلى جانب التعليم الحكومي الشبه مجاني بهذه الصيغة، هناك التعليم الموازي والتعليم المفتوح في جامعة دمشق؛ هناك أيضًا الجامعة الافتراضية السورية، والمعهد العالي لإدارة الأعمال والمعهد العالي للعلوم التطبيقية والتكنولوجيا، بعد السماح للقطاع الخاص الاستثمار في حقل التعليم العالي انتشرت في ضواحي دمشق عدد من الجامعات الخاصة أمثال الجامعة السورية الخاصة والجامعة العربية الدولية والجامعة الدولية للعلوم والتكنولوجيا.

الرياضة
يتوفر في مدينة دمشق منشآت رياضية لعدة رياضات شعبية مثل كرة القدم، وكرة السلة، والسباحة، والتنس، وتنس الطاولة والفروسية والشطرنج. وقد برز الاهتمام بالمنشآت الرياضية في أعقاب استضافة المدينة لأحداث رياضية هامة منها دورة الألعاب العربية الخامسة والسابعة بين عامي 1976 و1992 على التوالي، ومهرجان الشباب العربي عام 1981، إلى جانب العديد من الفعاليات الأخرى الأصغر حجمًا. كما تعدّ دمشق موطن لكثير من الأندية العريقة التي تنشط في الدوري الممتاز السوري لكرة القدم، هي نادي الجيش، ونادي الوحدة، ونادي المجد. تحوي دمشق مدينة الفيحاء الرياضية التي تضم ملعبًا لكرة القدم وصالات مغلقة لكرة اليد والسلة والطائرة ونوادي ومنشآت للجودو ورفع الأثقال والجمباز وملاعب تنس ومسابح. كما يوجد أيضًا ثلاث منشآت رياضية كبيرة في المدينة هي ملاعب تشرين والجلاء والعباسيين، ويوجد أيضا ميدان للفروسية وآخر للرماية في صحنايا على مقربة من دمشق.

الصحة
تحوي دمشق 43 مشفى خاص، وثلاثة مشافي كبيرة تديرها الحكومة أهمها مشفى تشرين، ومشفى المواساة الجامعي؛ تدير الحكومة أيضًا عددًا من المراكز الصحية موزعين على قطاعات دمشق الخمسة عشر، تقدم نحو 2.5 مليون خدمة طبية سنوية حسب الأرقام الرسمية. تقليديًا، فإنّ البيمارستانات كانت مشافي دمشق التاريخية، وأهمها البيمارستان النوري.

معالم
أسواق
تحوي مدينة دمشق نمطًا تقليديًا من الأسواق المسقوفة، داخل الأسوار وخارجها، أبرز أسواق دمشق المسقوفة أربع: سوق الحميدية، وسوق مدحت باشا، والبزورية، والحريقة، فضلاً عن وجود الأسواق التخصصية مثل سوق الصاغة المتخصص ببيع المجوهرات والمصاغ؛ بشكل عام يمكن إحصاء خمسين سوقًا تقليديًا متنوع الاستخدامات في مدينة دمشق؛ وتشكل فضلاً عن كونها ذات أهمية تراثية وأثرية كبيرة، أحد شرايين المدينة الاقتصادية حتى وقتنا الراهن. ويلاحظ بشكل خاص في سوريا العثمانية ازدهار «الخانات»، وهي بناء مربع من طابقين في وسطه ساحة مكشوفة يستخدم في الدور الأسفل كمستودع للبضائع والمعاملات التجارية وفي الدور الأعلى كمنامة للتجار، على أن أغلب الخانات تحولت لمتاحف، وأبرزها خان أسعد باشا. الأشكال الحديثة من الأسواق، يمكن تقسيمها إلى فئتين: الشوارع التي تكثر فيها المحلات التجارية مثل شارع الشعلان، وشارع الحمراء، ويعدّ البعض منطقة أبو رمانة بوصفها الوسط التجاري لدمشق الحديثة؛ والمراكز التجارية الكبيرة، وتحوي دمشق عددًا كبيرًا منها مثل: مالكي بلازا مول، شام سيتي سنتر، قاسيون مول، والآب تاون.

حدائق وأضرحة ونصب
تقليديًا يعدّ جبل قاسيون الفسحة الرئيسية لسكان دمشق، إلى جانب الجبل فإنّ مدينة دمشق تحوي 172 حديقة عامة تديرها محافظة دمشق، و790 حديقة خاصة ملحقة بالمنازل؛ تبلغ المساحة التقريبية لحدائق دمشق 1.4 مليون كليومتر مربع، أهم حدائق دمشق العامة وأكبرها حديقة تشرين، وحديقة السبكي، وحديقة التجارة. أبرز النصب العامة في مدينة دمشق، نصب الجندي المجهول في جبل قاسيون؛ ونصب ساحة المرجة التاريخي الذي أقيم لمناسبة ربط المدينة بالتغراف، ونصب السيف الدمشقي في ساحة الأمويين، والذي غدا «رمزًا من رموز مدينة دمشق المعمارية»؛ ونصب صلاح الدين الأيوبي مقابل سور القلعة؛ كما يترفع نصب يوسف العظمة في وسط ساحة المحافظة، شاهرًا سيفه.
تحوي دمشق 33 مقبرة عامة، أبرزها مقبرة باب الصغير ومقبرة الدحداح والتي تحوي قبورًا لشخصيات تاريخية عديدة؛ في المقبرتين المذكورتين تصل كلفة القبر لحوالي 500.000 ليرة سورية وغالبًا ما تتوارثه العائلة؛ غلاء أسعار القبور في دمشق دفع شرائح من السكان لدفن موتاها في الضواحي، على سبيل المثال في حرستا لا تتجاوز تكلفة القبر 20.000 ليرة سورية. أما أبرز الأضرحة، فسوى ضريح يوحنا المعمدان - يحيى - في الجامع الأموي، وضريح الست زينب في الضاحية المعروفة بالاسم في جنوب دمشق؛ فإن دمشق تحوي أكثر من 65 ضريحًا ألّفت حولها كتب مثل كتاب مشيدات دمشق ذوات الأضرحة؛ هذه الأضرحة تتنوع لشخصيات دينية مثل أم سلمة وحفصة بنت عمر بن الخطاب من أمهات المؤمنين، وصحابة مثل بلال الحبشي ودحية الكلبي، وأمراء مثل نور الدين زنكي، وصلاح الدين الأيوبي، والظاهر بيبرس، وفلاسفة وعلماء مثل محي الدين بن عربي والفارابي، وأخيرًا شخصيات سياسية معاصرة مثل شكري القوتلي.

دور الثقافة
تأسس المسرح في دمشق على يد أبو خليل القباني في القرن التاسع عشر، ويعدّ أول مسرح عربي حديث؛ في الأيام الراهنة تحوي دمشق 25 مسرحًا تديرها وزارة الثقافة أو الجهات الخاصة موزعة على 151 دار، أبرز مسارح دمشق دار أوبرا دمشق في ساحة الأمويين. أول دور السينما في دمشق تأسس عام 1916 حاليًا تحوي دمشق 36 دار للسينما بعضها لا زال في الخدمة منذ تلك الفترة؛ وتحوي دمشق أيضًا تسعة متاحف سورية، أبرزها المتحف الوطني الذي يحوي آثارًا من مختلف المحافظات السورية، فضلاً عن متحف دمشق التاريخي المؤسس لتوثيق الحياة في مدينة دمشق عبر القرون، إلى جانب المتاحف التخصصية، مثل متحف الخط العربي، والمتحف الحربي السوري، وغيرهما من متاحف المدينة السبعة. على صعيد المكتبات العامة، فإنّ المكتبة الظاهرية تعدّ من أكبر مكتبات الشرق من حيث المخطوطات القديمة والمؤلفات المحفوظة بها، والمكتبة الوطنية السورية التي افتتحت عام 1984 لتكون دارًا عامة للكتب في المدينة. إلى جانب المراكز الثقافية الوطنية، تحوي دمشق عددًا من المراكز الثقافية الأجنبية الملحقة بالبعثات الدبلوماسية، وتحوي الضواحي في مجمل محافظة ريف دمشق على 132 مركزًا ثقافيًا تابعًا لوزارة الثقافة.

دور العبادة
تحوي دمشق على حوالي 200 مسجد، و36 كنيسة، و10 كنس يهودية، لم يبق في الخدمة حاليًا منها سوى اثنان وبشكل غير متصل.
ويعدّ الجامع الأموي، أشهر مساجد دمشق، ومعالمها الدينية إجمالاً، واعتبره البعض رابع المساجد شهرة في الإسلام، تاركًا آثاره المعمارية على عدد من الأبنية الأخرى داخل وخارج سوريا. كما مساجد بارزة أخرى ذات أنماط أيوبية - مملوكية، أو عثمانية نذكر منها على المثال التكية السليمانية، وهناك أيضًا المساجد الحديثة؛ ويمكن تصنيف مساجد دمشق بثلاث تصنيفات المساجد بأصلها، والمساجد التي أنشأت كمدارس، والمساجد التي أنشأت كأضرحة. وتعدّ المدينة مقرًا دائمًا لثلاثة صروح بطريركية إنطاكية أبرزها الكنيسة المريمية، وكنيسة الزيتون، وتوجد إلى جانب هذه الكنائس الأثرية كنائس حديثة النمط المعماري مثل كنيسة الصليب في القصاع. إلى جانب دور العبادة، فإن الجهات المديرة لهذه الأماكن، تدير عددًا من المؤسسات المتصلة بها مثل مجمع الدراسات الإسلامية.

نمط العمارة
الأسلوب المعماري التقليدي في دمشق، هو ما يعرف في سوريا باسم البيت العربي وهو الأساس المعماري في المدينة القديمة، التي تتميز بالشوارع المرصوفة بالحجارة، والأزقة الضيقة، والإسراف في الزخرفة والتطعيم. منذ أواخر القرن التاسع عشر وبداية القرن العشرين، تطور أسلوب العمارة في دمشق، وانفتح على أساليب متعددة فرضتها تدخلات المعماريين الأجانب في عمارة بعض المنشآت العامة ثم تسربت اتجاهات العمارة الأوروبية الشائعة بواسطة المعماريين المحليين الذين درسوا في الغرب؛ وفي عام 1936 وضع أول مخطط تنظيمي شامل لمدينة دمشق على يد المعماري الفرنسي دانجييه عام 1936، والذي اهتم بصورة خاصة بتخطيط الشوارع الرئيسية وإنشاء الساحات الكبيرة الدائريّة، وفي عام 1963 قام المعماري الفرنسي ميشيل إيكوشار بتخطيط عمراني جديد لدمشق ساهم في توسعها نحو الجبال والشمال بشكل كبير، وقد صدرت عدة مخططات تنظيمية أخرى كان آخرها عام 2010، ركز هذا التخطيط الأخير على الضواحي والتوسعات.
ويمكن ملاحظة أنواع معمارية مختلفة في المدينة، مكتب عنبر على سبيل المثال يتبع نمط المحلي مضافًا إليه العمارة الباروكية، بينما محطة حديد الحجاز تتبع النمط الكلاسيكي الجديد مع طغيان العناصر المحلية في الزخرفة والتطعيم وجميع التفاصيل البناء الداخلية، وكذلك حال مبنى البرلمان، أما حي الصالحية يغلب عليه الطراز المتوسطي مثل مدرسة الفيحاء، في حين أن الطراز الكولونيالي يمكن أن تصنف ضمنه عدة أبنية منها مبنى العابد. الطراز الأوروبي التقليدي الذي ساد في القرن التاسع عشر وبدايات القرن العشرين، يصنّف ضمنه عدد كبير من أبنية دمشق التي بنيت في تلك الفترة، أبرزها فندق الشرق؛ ويعود للطراز المعماري الحديث كل من مبنى المكتبة الوطنية السورية، ومبنى دار أوبرا دمشق، والبنك المركزي.

طرق النقل والساحات
تنظم حركة النقل والمواصلات في دمشق، عدد من المحاور والطرق السريعة والعادية، المزودة بالجسور والأنفاق، أبرزها المتحلق الجنوبي، الذي يمرّ فوق مدينة دمشق رابطًا إياها بالريف، ومنتهيًا في شارع شكري القوتلي وسط المدينة؛ ويمتدّ المتحلق الشمالي بطول 37 كم، الذي يتصل مع الضواحي في الهامة مارًا فوق وادي بردى، وينتهي في حي الميدان. كذلك فإن ساحة الأمويين، وساحة العباسيين، تعدّان أبرز ساحتين في قلب المدينة وأكبرهما، وتقوم عقدة قصر الشعب وجسر المهاجرين المقام الأساسي في عقد المواصلات للقسم الغربي من المدينة، وعقدة القابون أساس قسمها الشرقي؛ وتقليديًا في ساحة المرجة تعدّ ساحة وسط مدينة دمشق. أما الطرق السريعة لخارج دمشق الكبرى، فأقدمها وأهمها طريق بيروت الشام، الذي يصلّ دمشق أيضًا بالمناطق الغربية من ريفها كالزبداني؛ والطريق الثاني هو طريق الأردن، الذي يربط دمشق بالمحافظات الجنوبية حتى عمان، والطريق الثالث شمالاً نحو حمص وحلب؛ وهناك أيضًا طريق تدمر وطريق المطار، بالاتجاه الشرقي من دمشق.

بين 1903 - 1962 كان ترام دمشق يستخدم داخل المدينة؛ أما سكك الحديد في دمشق بدأت عام 1895 بربط دمشق ببيروت، عبر عدة محطات على الطريق، وأنشأ عام 1900 الخط الحديدي الحجازي لربط المدينة بجنوبها حتى المدينة المنورة، وبشمالها حتى حلب واسطنبول، إلا أنه متوقف منذ الحرب العالمية الأولى، ومستبدل بآخر محلي يربط دمشق بحمص ومنها إلى سائر المحافظات الشمالية والغربية؛ كشفت الحكومة السوريّة مؤخرًا عن مشروع ربط المدن القريبة في ريف دمشق بالمدينة عن طريق سكك الحديد أيضًا، في حين تنفذ حاليًا مشروعًا لربط المدينة بسكك الحديد مع درعا والقنيطرة. وفي عام 2008، أعلنت الحكومة عن خطة لبناء مترو دمشق مع وقت افتتاح الخط الأخضر، ومن المقرر افتتاح المرحلة الأولى منه عام 2015، والمرحلة الرابعة والأخيرة عام 2050. أما المطار الرئيسي منذ 1975 هو مطار دمشق الدولي، على بعد 20 كيلومتر من مركز المدينة، وولجه 5.5 مليون مسافر خلال عام 2010 بزيادة تقدر 50% عما كان عليه عدد الوالجين خلال عام 2004؛ قبل مطار دمشق كان مطار المزة يعدّ بوابة دمشق الجويّة، وحوّل للاستعمال العسكري بعد افتتاح مطار دمشق.
النقل العام يتم من خلال سيارات الأجرة أو الحافلات الصغيرة التي تربط ضواحي المدينة بعضها ببعض، ويبلغ عدد مجمل الخطوط 100 خط يصل بعضها إلى قلب المدينة، وبعضها الآخر إلى الضواحي، مع تفوق لسيارات الأجرة. تواجه دمشق في السنوات الأخيرة أزمة مرورية متزايدة، حيث تسجَّل فيها 250 سيارة جديدة كل يوم، وهناك 40 عقدة مرورية بها بحاجة إلى حل، ويقدر إجمالي النقص في الحافلات العامة بمقدار 1,800 إلى 2,200 حافلة للنقل العام لتلبية احتياجات المدينة، فضلاً عن غياب المرائب التأرضيّة. وتعدّ سرعة السيارات في دمشق، مراقبة عبر هيئة مرور دمشق، التي وزعت ضوابط للعدادات وكاميرات مراقبة في شوارع المدينة.

الثقافة
ثقافة أهل دمشق تعدّ جزءًا من الثقافة السورية بشكل عام، مؤثرة ومتأثرة بها، فبينما تعدّ دمشق أصل العراضة الشامية، ورقصة السيف والترس التي انتقلت إلى المدن الأخرى، فإنّ الأنماط التقليدية للغناء، وأغاني دمشق التراثية التي يعود تأليف أشهرها لأبي خليل القباني، وفدت من ناحية النمط والأسلوب من حلب. من عادات دمشق شبه المندثرة، إقامة الاحتفالات الخاصة لمناسبات الولادة، أو الختان، ويتم تقليديًا في عمر سبع سنوات؛ والاحتفالات التي تقام في الحمامات العامة، وحضور الحكواتي والكركوزاتي أو مسرح خيال الظل؛ وقد فصّل عدد كبير من المؤرخين أنواع الاحتفالات التي تقام في دمشق، ومجالس اللهو والطرب التقليدية منها الأصفهاني في كتاب الأغاني، من ناحية المطبخ السوري في دمشق، فللمدينة بعض أصناف من الأطباق تختصّ بها وحدها مثل حراء بأصبعو، كما تعدّ السيارين أو السياحة في بساتين الغوطة أو جبل قاسيون، أحد عناصر ثقافة دمشق، والتي حسب ما ذكره المؤرخون، ذات أصول معينة، ففي سبع سبوت في العام تتم في الغوطة، وفي خمسة أخمسة في العام تتم في قاسيون، إلى جانب الاحتفال ببدأ فصل الربيع أو النوروز من عموم أهل دمشق. اللهجة السورية السائدة في دمشق ذات ألف مثقلة أكثر من باقي المدن والمناطق وهو ما يميّزها؛ في الدراما السورية، ومع مسلسل أيام شامية عام 1992 برز نمط جديد يعرف باسم مسلسلات البيئة الشامية، والذي يوّثق الحياة اليومية لأهل دمشق من مختلف الصعد والجوانب في مرحلة سوريا العثمانية، أو بدايات الانتداب الفرنسي، يذكر أنّ مسلسل باب الحارة حقق في جزءه الثاني جماهيرية شعبيّة في الوطن العربي دفعت صحيفة الواشنطن بوست لاعتباره أحد الأعمال التلفزيونية العشرة الأكثر متابعة حول العالم. رغم ذلك، فإنّ هذه الطائفة من الدراما استقطبت انتقادات واسعة وذهب عدد متزايد من النقاد لاعتبارها لا تنقل واقع دمشق شكل أمين بل بشكل مشوّه. وقد أنشأت القرية الشامية، كمنطقة تحاكي دمشق في تلك المرحلة. في عام 2008 تم اختيار دمشق عاصمة للثقافة العربية، وأقيمت العديد من الفعاليات والنشاطات ضمن الاحتفالات، وصدرت العديد من الأعمال التوثيقية حول دمشق للمناسبة.

في الشعر والأدب
من شعرها في وصف دمشقعائشة الباعونية[من ]

عبر التاريخ، وصفت دمشق ومدحت في العديد من الآداب العالمية من قبل الرحالة، والشعراء، والروائيين، بعضهم أجانب مثل الرحالة الفرنسي لامارتين، والبعض الآخر عرب. مدح دمشق في الأدب العربي يعود لما قبل الإسلام حتى، وقد مدح حسان بن ثابت دمشق ببضع أبيات؛ أما أبرز من مدح دمشق في الأدب القديم، فيذكر البحتري، وأبي تمام في الشعر، وابن جبير والمقدسي في أدب الرحلات، كما وضعت مؤلفات مستقلة في وصف دمشق مثل كتاب «النجوم الزاهرة في أخبار دمشق والقاهرة»، وكتاب «نزهة الأنام في محاسن الشام» للبدري. حديثًا، ومنذ النهضة العربية في القرن التاسع عشر، فإن معظم شعراء العرب البارزين، من سوريين وغير سوريين، قد كتبوا عن دمشق، منهم أحمد شوقي، محمود درويش، سعيد عقل، عمر أبو ريشة، نزار قباني، بشارة الخوري وسواهم. هذه الأعمال جمعت في ديوان دمشق الذي أطلق لمناسبة احتفالية دمشق عاصمة الثقافة العربية؛ والبعض منها، تحولت إلى أغاني مثل قصيدتي شام يا ذا السيف وقرأت مجدك لسعيد عقل وقد غنتهما فيروز، والقصيدة الدمشقية لنزار قباني وقد غنتها أصالة نصري.

مدن شقيقة
المدن الشقيقة لدمشق هي:

معرض الصور
انظر أيضًا
الجدول الزمني لتاريخ دمشق.

المراجع
كتب
مواقع خارجية

موقع محافظة دمشق.
أهم الأحداث في تاريخ دمشق من موقع فهرس.نت


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 306
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Damas_(homonymie)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

== Toponyme ==
Villes, communes
Syrie (République arabe syrienne) :
Damas est la capitale et la plus grande ville de Syrie ;
Affaire de Damas (1840) ;
France (République française) :
Damas-aux-Bois est une commune française du département des Vosges ;
Damas-et-Bettegney est une commune française du département des Vosges ;
États-Unis d'Amérique :
Damas ou Damascus, Arkansas ;
Damas ou Damascus, Georgia  ;
Damas ou Damascus, Maryland  ;
Damas ou Damascus, Ohio  ;
Damas ou Damascus, Oregon  ;
Damas ou Damascus, Pennsylvania ;
Damas ou Damascus, Virginia ;
Îles : 
Isla Damas  :
Isla Damas (Chili) ;
Isla Damas (Costa Rica).

Patronyme
Maison de Damas :
Étienne-Charles de Damas-Crux (1754-1846), général français,
François de Damas-Crux (1739-1829), prélat français,
François Auguste Damas (1773-1812), général français,
François-Étienne de Damas (1764-1828), général français,
Jean-Pierre de Damas d'Anlezy (1734-1800), général français,
Louis-Étienne-François de Damas-Crux (1735-1814), général français ;
Alexandre-Martial-Auguste Damas (1772-1834), comédien français ;
Geneviève Damas (1970-), actrice, dramaturge et metteuse en scène belge ;
Jean-Joseph-Stanislas-Albert Damas-Hinard (1805-1891), historien français ;
Léon-Gontran Damas (1912-1978), écrivain et homme politique français ;
Erlyne Antonella Ndembet Damas (1974-), femme politique gabonaise.

Autres
Le damas est un tissu ;
L'acier de Damas est un type d'acier présentant des motifs ondulés ; un damas est une arme blanche fabriquée à Damas selon ce principe : une lame de fer dont le tranchant est d’acier : le damas à décoller des Capitouls, à Toulouse.
Le damas noir est un cépage français.
Le damas (canon de) est un canon de fusil fabriqué à Olne, Principauté de Liège dès la seconde moitié du 17e siècle qui a la particularité de ne pas exploser après une longue utilisation et vendus, par milliers lors de la guerre de sécession aux deux camps.
Le damasquinage  est une technique artistique ;
Le Daewoo Damas est un petit utilitaire de GM Daewoo.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 5,207
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Damascus
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Damascus (دمشق Dimaşk) is the capital and largest city of Syria. A city of immense historical importance, Damascus was the capital of the Umayyad Caliphate during the Islamic Golden Age. As a city of immense religious importance, Damascus is home to the Street Called Straight, where the Apostle Paul (Saul) converted to Christianity; the Minaret of ʿĪsā, where Muslims believe ʿĪsā (Jesus) will return to the Earth to herald in the End of Days; and the Umayyad Mosque, where the relics of John the Baptist (Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyā) are kept. Damascus is the City of Jasmine and is a major cultural center in both the Islamic and Arabic worlds, and in safer times has been a major tourist destination.

## Understand
Established between 10,000 to 8,000 BCE, Damascus is credited with being one of, if not the oldest continuously inhabited city in the world. The world heritage listed old-walled city, in particular, feels very ancient and largely consists of a maze of narrow alleys, punctuated by enigmatic doors that lead into pleasing, verdant courtyards and blank-faced houses. The old city still has an authentic medieval feel to it, although this was quickly vanishing due to the increasing tourist traffic as the city continued to be highlighted as an attraction. Life, however, goes on in the old-walled city, which is still the religious and social center of the city.
Due to the Syrian Civil War which began in 2011, many services in the city, including transportation, accommodation and consular services, have been severely disrupted. Power interruptions are frequent, the Syrian pound currency has been subject to hyperinflation (to the point where prices listed here are meaningless) and the war is not far from mind even during the brief moments when life goes on normally. Many have left the country, been drafted into military service or killed in action. On December 8, 2024, rebel groups entered Damascus and captured it, ending the Assad regime. The city is home to about 2.5 million people (2022), and the metropolitan area to 5 million.
Large parts of the article describes the situation before the war. While the security situation is generally improving in Syria and especially in Damascus, travel to most of Syria is still considered very unsafe by most governments.

## By plane
As of mid 2025, flights to Damascus are limited, but beginning to increase. Several major carriers are resuming flights with scheduled services now available from regional hubs such as Istanbul and Doha. National carrier SyrianAir operates a small regional network with flights from Abu Dhabi, Amman, Baghdad, Dubai, Doha and Kuwait City several times per week.
Only taxi companies are allowed to pickup customers from the airport. Taxi fares may vary depending on your bargaining skills. There are also buses departing to and from Baramkeh bus station in the center of town (airport buses are the only ones which serve this bus station now - all other services have moved to the new out of town Soumaria bus station). There are departures every half an hour, 24 hours a day. At the airport, come out of the terminal and turn right - you will find the bus at the end of the building. There is a small ticket office. The bus will drop you a bit far from the Old City, but there many taxis around to get you there. Make sure to ask for the meter.
33.411136.51251 Damascus International Airport (مَطَار دِمَشْق الدَّوْلِيّ). DAM  IATA. The airport is relatively well-equipped with most standard services. Getting Syrian pounds at Damascus International Airport might be tricky, as the change counters only accept US dollars. There are two ATMs in the main lobby that accept credit cards and foreign debit cards, but they tend to be unreliable. Your best bet is to bring a small amount of US dollars with you into Syria, and change it at the airport until you can withdraw from Damascus ATMs.      (updated Jan 2024)

## By train
As of early 2025, all long-distance train services to Damascus are still suspended, including the once-weekly sleeper trains from Istanbul and Tehran. The historic Hejaz station in the city centre remains closed and future services will depart and arrive at from Al-Qadam railway station south of the city centre.
33.476536.29052 Al-Qadam railway station.    (updated Jun 2021)

## By car
It isn't a very good idea to rent a car in Damascus. There is almost always a traffic jam, especially in summer, and parking tends to be difficult too; although that isn't the situation in suburbs.

## By bus
Micro buses, also known as servees, are one of the main sources of transportation in Damascus. You can go from one place to another in Damascus with one or at most two journeys. When on the bus, give any passenger a coin and they will pass it to the driver and return the change. Remember to tell that passenger how many people you are paying for, whether you are in a group, or that you are paying "for one" ("waahid") if you are alone. The route is written (in Arabic only) on the roof sign. Micro buses do not generally have fixed stops except at very busy points, just beckon to the driver and they will stop near you (Al yameen, andak iza samaht).
There are also many city buses. One useful bus is #15, which runs from Al-Marjeh Square (Souq Sarouja\Old Town) to the Western Bus Station, which serves Beirut and Amman.

## Get around
At rush hours (10:00-16:00), the best way of transport is on foot. Smoking is absolutely forbidden on all public transport.

## By foot
A very good idea is to go on foot especially for a sightseeing, and it's the only way to get around in Old Damascus. Walking in the new city however, should be reserved to the nicer areas of Maliki and Abu-Rumaneh, as the new city tends to be pollution clogged. The driving culture in Damascus is not the safest, so beware as a pedestrian, especially in the new city. Cars will not hesitate to come extremely close to pedestrians or other cars in order to pass.

## By taxi
Taxis are plentiful in Damascus, making them a great mode of transportation. The taxis of Star Taxi, a private company, are more expensive than normal taxis, but they are also more comfortable and safer. You can call their headquarters and they will send the nearest taxi to your door. Taxis with the Damascus Governorate logo on the side and a number on the roof sign are normally equipped with a meter, and it is best to use only these when hailing a taxi on the street. You should normally leave a tip as well as the fare on the meter. At night, taxi drivers do not usually use the meter, so you may be best off negotiating the price before you get in. A service taxi to Amman or Beirut takes around 4 hours and run 24 hours. Do not hesitate to take them; they are clean vehicles with air conditioning.

## See
The Souq al-Hamidiyya, a broad street packed with tiny shops, is entered through columns from a Roman temple built on a site that had been occupied by an even older temple. The souqs themselves smell of cumin and other distinctive spices and you can find passages dedicated to everything from leather and copper goods to inlaid boxes and silk scarves.
At the end of Souq al-Hamidiyya stands the great Umayyad Mosque; this building with three minarets is an architectural wonder. It was an Assyrian temple, then a Roman temple to Jupiter, a church when Rome converted to Christianity, then a mosque and a church together, and finally a mosque until now. All the symbols are still pretty much there and some Christian drawings can still be very clearly seen on the walls inside. The mosque contains the grave of John the Baptist (prophet Yahya to Muslims) inside the main lounge. Muslims also believe that this is the site where Jesus will descent back to Earth on his Second Coming. Women are asked to be to cover their hair, arms and legs. Abayas (full-body covers) are provided with the entrance ticket. It is one of the most sacred sites of Islam, and it welcomes foreign tourists, who are allowed to walk around the prayer area.
At the other end of Souq al-Hamidiyya is a fort-like section of the extant city wall that is the Citadel (but make sure to visit Aleppo's Citadel for a truly amazing experience).
Nearby, you can visit the Mausoleum of Salah al-Din, known in the west as Saladin, the chief anti-crusader. There's a great statue of him on horseback right next to the citadel, which will make you gasp. If you walk all the way around it, there are two dejected Frankish knights underneath the horse's slightly lifted tail. These two knights are identified by inscriptions as Guy de Lusignan, King of Jerusalem, and Reynald de Chatillon, lord of Kerak, an important fortress in the Holy Land. Both were captured during Salah al-Din's definitive victory at Hattin; Guy was imprisoned in Damascus and eventually released, but Reynald was executed as punishment for his many atrocities.

## Old Damascus
33.511636.30381 Temple of Jupiter. Roman temple, built in the 1st century BCE.   (updated Jul 2021)
33.51138936.3066672 Umayyad Mosque (الْجَامِع الْأُمَوِي).   (updated Jun 2021)
33.51027836.3069443 Azm Palace. Built in 1749, it includes a museum describing the life of royal families.      (updated Oct 2018)
33.51166736.3019444 Citadel of Damascus. Medieval fortified palace and citadel, now partly ruined.   (updated Jul 2021)
33.5117536.3005835 Statue of Saladin (تمثال صلاح الدين الأيوبي). Unveiled in 1993, marking the 800th anniversary of Saladin's death.   (updated Feb 2024)
33.50916736.3066676 Khan As'ad Pasha. Largest caravanserai in the Old City of Damascus, built in 1758.   (updated Jul 2021)
33.51027836.3055567 Khan al-Harir (خَان الْحَرِير).   (updated Feb 2024)
33.5080336.3129128 Menarsha Synagogue.   (updated Jan 2024)
33.50709536.3124079 Racqy Synagogue (كنيس الراكي).   (updated Dec 2024)
33.50758736.31226310 Elfrange Synagogue. Last remaining functioning synagogue in Damascus. Built in the 19th century, it has been renovated.   (updated Jan 2024)
33.51138936.317511 Saint Ananias House (كَنيسَةُ الْقِدِّيسِ حَنَانِيَا). Said to be the home Ananias of Damascus who baptized Saul, which came to be Paul the Apostle. Excavations have revealed a 5th- or 6th-century underground church.   (updated Jan 2024)
33.5104536.31501712 Cathedral of Saint George. Syriac Orthodox cathedral.   (updated Jan 2024)
33.51211136.30593313 Mausoleum of Saladin (Adjacent to the Umayyad Mosque). Resting place and grave of the medieval Muslim Ayyubid Sultan Saladin, built in 1196.   (updated Jul 2021)
33.508436.316314 Cathedral of Our Lady of the Dormition (كَاتِدْرَائِيَّةُ سَيِّدَةِ النِّيَاحِ لِلرُّومِ الْمَلَكِيِّينَ فِي دِمَشْقَ). Melkite Greek Catholic cathedral.   (updated Jan 2024)
33.50944436.31138915 Mariamite Cathedral of Damascus (الكَنِيسَة المَرْيَمِيَّة).   (updated Jan 2024)
33.50933936.31658916 Syriac Catholic Cathedral of Saint Paul (كَاتِدرَائِيَّة مَار بُولُس).   (updated Jan 2024)
The ancient city of Damascus had seven city gates, of which four remains to be seen. Most of the walls surrounding the old town have however disappeared.
33.5062536.30652817 Bab al-Saghir (بَـاب الـصَّـغِـيْـر).   (updated Jul 2021)
33.5137336.315218 Bab Tuma (بَابُ تُومَا). Meaning the Gate of Thomas, celebrating Saint Thomas the Apostle, one of the twelve apostles of Jesus Christ.   (updated Jul 2021)
33.50944436.31777819 Bab Sharqi (بَابٌ شَرْقِيٌّ). The Eastern Gate, this is the only gate built during Roman times that still stands.   (updated Jul 2021)
33.50638936.31527820 Bab Kisan (بَابُ كِيسَانَ).   (updated Jul 2021)

## Other sights
33.51257236.29004421 National Museum of Damascus (المتحف الوطني بدمشق), Shukri al-Quwatli St.      (updated Dec 2018)
33.51230936.29133822 Sulaymaniyya Takiyya (التَّكِيَّة السُّلَيْمَانِيَّة).   (updated Jun 2021)
33.515536.310923 Aqsab Mosque (جَامِع الْأَقْصَاب). Ayyubid-era mosque, completed in 1234.   (updated Feb 2024)
33.535436.320724 October War Panorama. Out in the suburbs but accessible by minibus or taxi. It's about US$7 to get in and well worth it. It was built with the help of the North Korean Government and the influence shows. There is an exhibit of military hardware outside. English-speaking guides are available. Many big galleries contain murals commemorating the life of former president Hafez al-Assad. Other exhibits include paintings, which represent the history of Syria with a mixture of Arab and Syrian nationalism.      (updated Oct 2018)
33.51121836.2949625 Hejaz railway station (محطة الحجاز). No longer an active railway station, this historic building remains an important landmark in the city. Since it clousure around 2008 there has been temporary exhibitions but its future remains unclear.   (updated Jul 2021)
33.5131736.2774826 Damascene Sword Monument (نصب السيف الدمشقي). Widely considered as the symbol of the city, the monument is meant to be a reminder of "the victories, strength and achievements of the Syrian people".  (updated Jan 2024)
33.5261436.2547927 Tomb of the Unknown Soldier (ضريح الجندي المجهول). War memorial dedicated to the Syrian soldiers killed during battle.   (updated May 2023)
33.52636.33508328 Jobar Synagogue. Ancient synagogue built in 720 BC. It was partly destroyed in 2014.   (updated Dec 2024)

## Do
View the city from Mount Qasioun is a  must-do activity in Damascus as it offers a panoramic view. The peak is accessible at any time, although the view is perhaps most spectacular at night when the whole city is lit up and the minarets of mosques are bathed in green light. The Umayyad Mosque in the old town is particularly impressive when viewed from the mountain. There is a wide range of food and refreshment available on the peak from stalls to fancy restaurants that serve good local cuisine and alcohol. Check the price before you get too comfortable though as it is a well-known scam for taxi drivers to take you to their 'favorite' cafe, where you'll end up paying a fortune for a cup of tea.
Visit a restaurant in old Damascus. There are many restaurants in the old quarter each with their own unique character, but perhaps the most famous (and touristy) is "Beit Jabri", although "Al-Khawali" is considered by many to be the best dining experience in the old city. Another restaurant in the old city, Narcissus Palace, located close to Maktab Anbar, would offer an enlightening experience. Every night, a singer and band play old Arabic music and create an amazing atmosphere in the restaurant. A good idea, when considering these restaurants, is to go for breakfast, and then go sightseeing. The breakfast is very cheap.
Relax at a Hooka cafe "Narjelah" Hooka cafes are popular in Damascus and are easy to find. When visiting the old city, you'll get a more cultural or traditional experience. You'll probably find a crowd of tea-drinking, backgammon-playing men all smoking hooka.  In the modern city, most cafes cater to a younger crowd and are a big part of the night life offering a huge variety of flavored tobacco ranging from double apple which is the most common, to cappuccino. In almost every major restaurant, hookas are available, including the restaurants in the old city.
33.51222236.2786111 Damascus Opera House.   (updated Jul 2021)

## Hammams
Bathing in a hammam, i.e., a Turkish bath, is a great way of both soaking up the atmosphere of Old Damascus and to be rejuvenated after a long day. Two baths that are familiar with Western tourists are Nur-al-Din Bath and Bakri Bath. A visit to either includes towels, soap, scrub, a massage and a tea. The price is typically composed of bath entry, scrub, sauna, massage, and extras such as tea or soap. Nur-al-Din is for men only, Bakri might be able to accommodate women or mixed groups upon prior arrangement. Bakri Bath: for women each day except Friday 10:00-17:00.
Nur-al-Din Bath (between the Azem Palace and Straight Street). (updated Jul 2021)
Bakri Bath (first street on the right after entering the Old City at Bab Touma). (updated Jul 2021)

## Arabic
There are several institutions in Damascus that teach Arabic:
Language Institute at Damascus University [dead link] - The Language Institute fully immerse their students in Arabic; the course materials and all interaction between students and teachers are done in Arabic. Students are placed in beginning, intermediate or advanced courses based on a placement test.
Ma'had [dead link]- This state-run language academy is in the Mezze district of Damascus. It is the cheapest option, although the courses are not as good as those at Damascus University.
The British Council - While the classes may be expensive, they are mainly aimed toward diplomats and businessmen.
DSA - Damascus Language School for Standard Arabic[dead link]- The school provides basic courses for beginners and advanced courses also on certain topics as for journalists, physicians, diplomats, engineers, etc. Normal classes have maximum 4 students. Lessons with private teachers are even possible. Twice a year, there are certain courses for students available at half price. Teachers are well experienced in teaching foreigners. Basic courses start every Saturday.
Arabesk Studies in Damascus [formerly dead link] - The institute offers extensive classes in Arabic. Aide with living arrangement provided.
TikaTrip - Travels and Studies in Syria [dead link]- Providing private Arabic tutors as well as professional language teachers and all important services: starting with the pickup service at the airport, arranging accommodation and advices on how to tackle the bureaucratic procedures.
Tour Guide :
You can get an English speaking guide by emailing : zenab71@aol.com.

## Buy
Damascus offers some of the best shopping in the Middle East.  Prices are cheap, and since very few stores depend on tourists for their income, most will leave you alone to browse until you are ready to buy.  Small stores are found throughout the old city, although the Souq al-Hamidiyya, located along the Roman straight street, offers the highest density of shops.  The souq is a fantastic experience, but be prepared for the crowds.
33.51094536.3016441 Al-Hamidiyah Souq (سُوق ٱلْحَمِيدِيَّة).   (updated Jan 2024)

## Budget
Al-Rabie Hotel, Sharia bahsa, Souq saroujah (on an attractive side street about a 5-10 minute walk from the citadel), ☏ +963 11 231-8374, alrabiehotel@hotmail.com. It has an attractive courtyard, and clean rooms.  Breakfast is included in the price.  Some of the rooms that share a bath are a bit of a hike from the bath and shower rooms. No alcohol allowed on the premises. The design of the hotel is beautiful but staff can be very rude and don't expect to be made to feel welcome.
Hotel Al-Ghazal, Sharia souq saroujah (in souq Saroujah, at the street turning out towards Jisr-Al-Thawra, the revolution bridge), ☏ +963 11 231-3736, info@ghazalhotel.com. Also known as Ghazal Hotel, this hotel is a newcomer in the Saroujah budget hotels. It has a very attractive, typical Damascus courtyard. For breakfast, they serve the usual range of teas and coffees and good water pipe free of charge. You can bring alcohol to drink in the courtyard. Rooms and facilities are new. Several new, clean bathrooms with hot water and also a hostel portion in the same structure. There is safe for valuables. Owners are helpful and service-minded, but they speak less English than their competitors and don't arrange tours or otherwise on a regular basis (but could still probably help out if you ask). English spoken enough to arrange rooms, get/give directions and special circumstances. For foreign students of Arabic, the hotel staff are very accommodating and surprisingly insightful with the limited English they speak. If you are a light sleeper, you should avoid rooms close to the kitchen, bathrooms and reception area. The rooms facing onto the courtyard are peaceful. 9. (updated Nov 2020)
Al-Haramain Hotel, Sharia bahsa, Souq saroujah (next to the Al-Rabie Hotel), ☏ +963 11 231-9489. Some of the rooms on the upper floors lack heaters and can be very cold in the winter unless the door to the common space is left open. The courtyard is smaller than in Al-Rabie, but the staff is nice and friendly. Showers are in the basement. Helpful staff that can arrange tours and otherwise cater to tourist needs. No alcohol allowed on the premises. Reservations needed. Scam warning: their email has been hacked. If someone responds to your email asking for money up front,do not send it! Al Haramain is not a low budget hotel, so check prices before booking. Prices are more expensive than nearby hostels. Breakfast is always included in the price.
Sultan Hotel (almost opposite Hejaz Train Station). Check-out: 12:00. In a good location, 10–15 minutes' walk from the Old Town in one direction and the National Museum in the other. US$55 per night for a double room including breakfast, but most currencies are accepted..

## Mid-range
33.51306536.2941091 Al-Madinah City Hotel, ☏ +963 963 11 2219375, fax: +963 112453817, info@cityhotel-sy.com.    (updated Oct 2018)
[dead link] Al Majed Hotel, 29th May Street (above Yusef Al-'Azmeh Square, behind the Assufara (Ambassadors') Cinema), ☏ +963 11 232-3300, fax: +963 11 232-3304, majed@almajed-group.com. This family-run 60-room hotel remains a very popular, secure and central place to stay for travellers of all sorts, from businessmen to backpackers. The Al Majed Restaurant, open 24 hours, is on the top floor of the Hotel with a variety of dishes, from traditional Middle Eastern dishes to Continental cuisine.
[formerly dead link]  Damascus Hostel (Al Abbara Street from Straight Street, or rope ladder on city walls 100 m from Bab Sharqi), ☏ +963 11 541-4115. This hostel has a unique location, with some rooms in a tower on the city wall. While the location is excellent and the rooms are decent. Laundry service with an automatic washer is available. Satellite television is available in the common area but there is no on-site Internet access. The website has both a printable map with directions and GPS coordinates.
[formerly dead link]  Dana Residence, Qudssaya Suburb (around 10 km from Damascus centre), ☏ +963 11 323 56 61. Offers various-sized apartments, suitable for all numbers of persons. Each apartment has its own balcony with breath-taking views of the mountains. Prices start at $US50.
[dead link] Fallouh House, in the heart of The old city of Damascus-Bab Touma, ☏ +963 933 356955, fallouh.house@gmail.com. Has air conditioned rooms (singles, doubles) with satellite TV, telephone and mini-bar. You can ask for a car to pick you up from the airport. The courtyard contains fountain and is full of plants. Prices start at US$35.
[dead link] House of Damascus, info@houseofdamascus.com. rents a rooms for students studying in Damascus in a beautiful, traditional Arabic house in the heart of the Old City of Damascus. The house includes seven bedrooms, two bathrooms, two kitchens, a beautiful courtyard and a rooftop terrace with a great view over Old Damascus. Each bedroom is furnished with a TV, bed, wardrobe, dresser and heater (air-con in some rooms). The kitchens are fully equipped (gas stove, microwave, kettle, oven etc.) and the modern bathrooms have hot water 24 hours a day. Washing machine, internet access (dial-up) and fixed telephone (landline) are also available.
Hotel Old Damascus, Bab Tuma Square near Haretna Restaurant, ☏ +963 11 541-4042. In the Old City, near the St. Thomas gate, on one of those two-metre-wide pedestrian-only streets that are so common in the older neighbourhoods. The Old Damascus has about a dozen rooms and used to be a typical Arab home of the sort common among prosperous merchants in the early 1900s. A Syrian-Arab family owns and operates the hotel.
[dead link] Orient Gate Hotel, opposite Venesia Hotel, beginning of Saroujah Entrance, Bahsa St. (within walking distance of the commercial markets and many restaurants), ☏ +963 11 231 6224, fax: +963 933 226 012, info@orientgatehotel.com. The hotel has 25 air-conditioned rooms (doubles, twins, and triples) with satellite TV, telephone and mini-bar. Safe deposit box at the reception. Staff are available to assist guests 24 hours a day. Summer terrace looking out over Damascus city. Prices start at US$36.
[dead link] Sah al Naum Bed and Breakfast, Baghdad street, Ekeibeh neighbourhood, Amara, ☏ +963 11 231 0884, info@sahalnaum.com. Offers long- as well as short-term stays. The 400-year-old house has been renovated. The two-storey house prides has 27 furnished rooms restored in Ottoman decorative styles. With wireless internet access, laundry facilities and a fully equipped kitchen. The house has two open courtyards with view of Qasiun mountain. Starting from €45.

## Splurge
Cham Hotel, ☏ +963 11 223-2300, fax: +963 11 221-2398, reservations@chamhotels.com. Syria's national hotel chain, and one of the largest business-class hotels in the city.
33.51436.29112 Four Seasons Hotel Damascus (فندق فور سيزنز دمشق), Shukri Al Quatli Street, ☏ +963 11 339-1000, fax: +963 11 339-0900. The Four Seasons, in the city centre, offers many services, such as spa, baby-sitting, and fitness facilities. This hotel houses the Al Halabi restaurant, which features the Aleppo cuisine of northern Syria.      (updated Jul 2021)
Blue Tower Hotel, Hamra Street, ☏ +963 11 3340240, fax: +963 11 3342112, info@bluetowerhotel.com. Offers all the services of a four-star international hotel; Presidential suite, bathrooms are provided with jacuzzi, comfortable rooms equipped with the modern technology services; communication facilities including free high-speed internet (wireless in the lobby and wired in the rooms). Additional facilities include an international restaurant, bar and café.
Baik Bash hotel and restaurant, Straight Street, ☏ +963 11 5436007, fax: +963 11 5436008, info@baikbash.com. Offers all the services of a five-star hotel, double king-sized beds, modern equipment, terrace cafe, basement cinema cafe, reading lounges, restaurant, salon, VIP area, Wi-Fi.

## Drink
The coffee houses of Old Damascus were something to experience. Hours could dissolve over a cup of shay (tea) or ahwa (coffee) among the smoke of a nargileh (water pipe) . An-Naufara (which means 'The Fountain') was a wonderful place to do this, just east of the Umayyad Mosque. There was even a Hakawati (a traditional story teller) present at 19:00 most nights.
If you were craving a European coffee, you could have headed for Abu Rommeneh street and looked for the Bennetton clothing store. There were a number of fancy cafés in the area, including the Middle Eastern chain Inhouse Coffee, which is similar to Starbucks in its prices and atmosphere. Free Wi-Fi was offered at each location throughout the city.
Apart from that, many bars and nightclubs had been set up in Damascus.  These were usually busy at night time, but they still provided nice alcoholic beverages and dances.
Clubs in Damascus that weren't all prostitutes (around Bab Sharqi): La Serai, La Vida Loca.
Many establishments have closed because of the war; as of mid-2016 there have been reports of businesses gradually returning to the Old City or Old Quarter of Damascus.
Old Town establishments which have reopened include:
La Marionnette Pub, الشهبندر مقابل وزارة التربية, ☏ +963 958 741 013. (updated Apr 2016)
33.509636.3162161 Pub Sharqi (شرقي), Al Qashla Avenue, ☏ +963 965 992 200.    (updated Sep 2017)
33.514636.29512 Havana Cafe (مَقْهًى الْهَافَانَا). Established in 1945, this café was for a long time the main meeting place of the cultural elite in Damascus.   (updated Jul 2021)

## Sleep
Souq-Al-Saroujah is where you find the cluster of backpacker hotels.  Martyr's Square or "Merjeh" in Arabic is the other place worth considering if you're on a tight budget, though many of the places double as brothels. However, at least the hotels below can be recommended.  Women alone should avoid hotels at Merjeh Square, because it's the red light district of Damascus.
Most hotels in Damascus claiming to be 5 stars are actually closer to what Western travellers know as 2 stars. The Syrian government runs its own accreditation agency that gives highly suspect inflated ratings to hotels owned by Syrian chains and those that have paid "baksheesh" (bribes) to the authorities. Due to the American sanctions of Syria, credit cards linked to US banks will not be accepted (this is pretty much every credit card in the world).

## Stay safe
See the Syria article for information on the security situation.
In rural and modern areas of Damascus, people have been known to be perfectly healthy, but to imitate beggars in order to get money. Often, they will attempt to con you by giving more money and have many tricks to do so. Exercise caution.
Also, for your safety, do not take advice or recommendations, especially about accommodation, doctors and dentists, from taxi drivers.
Damascus itself has not been an active war zone for several years now. Nonetheless, the political by-products of the war continue to negatively impact travellers. In particular, checkpoints are everywhere in the city and its environs, staffed by underpaid and notoriously corrupt soldiers and policemen. Especially if you are not Arab, Russian, or Iranian, you can expect to be repeatedly shaken down for bribes (ranging from food and cigarettes to cash). Do not get in these people's bad books under any circumstances; Syria is not a country where the rule of law applies. Nonetheless, Damascus is physically safe for tourists who are respectful and willing to "pay to play". Travelling with a guide at all times is strongly recommended, if only to make such interactions less stressful.

## Connect
Most hotels can arrange international phone calls, but prices are very expensive.  Most internet cafes are set up for VOIP, and offer a much cheaper alternative, although the price does reflect the quality of the connection.
Internet access is widely available, although the Syrian government censors traffic, which can cause some interesting quirks in connectivity.

## Cope
Very few large banks will cash American Express Traveller Cheques in Damascus and elsewhere in Syria. ATMs and credit cards are not a reliable option.
ATMs are not always in operation. Change houses exist in many areas in Damascus, especially near the large souks. The euro, British pound, and American dollar can be changed at these shops, usually commission-free. Be sure to look up the current exchange rate before changing money so you do not get cheated. Many shops, especially in the old city), also change money. Though it is illegal, it is a handy option when you're already shopping in the old city and need to change some cash quickly. Just ask around the shopkeepers for a money changer and you will soon be directed to a store that does currency exchange.

## Embassies
Canada, Lot 12 Mezze Autostrade. Global Affairs Canada states "The Embassy of Canada to Syria in Damascus has suspended operations.". (updated Aug 2023)
China, 83, Rue Ata Ayoubi, ☏ +963 11 332 7968, fax: +963 11 333 8067, chinaemb_sy@mfa.gov.cn. Su-Th 08:00-14:00. (updated Feb 2024)
Czech Republic, Abou Roummaneh, Misr Street No. 51, ☏ +963 11 333 13 83, +963 11 333 93 95, +963 11 333 09 35, damascus@embassy.mzv.cz. Includes a United States interests section for U.S. citizens needing emergency consular services.
Greece, Mazzeh-East, Farabi Str. Garden, Pharaon Bldg. (P.O. Box 30319 Damascus), ☏ +963 11 6113035, fax: +963 1161 14920, gremb.dam@mfa.gr. 08:30-16:00.
India, 3455, Sharkassiyeh, Ibn Al Haitham St, Abu Rumaneh (P.O. Box 685), ☏ +963 11 334-73-51, fax: +963 11 334-57-11.
Indonesia, Mazzech, Eastern Villas, Madina Al-Munawwara Street 132, Block No. 270/A Building No. 26 (P.O. Box 3530), ☏ +963 11 611-9630, +963 11 611-9631, fax: +963 11 611-9632, kbridamaskus@kemlu.go.id.
Romania, Str. Ibrahim Hanano 8, Cartier Al-Maliki, P.O. Box 4454, ☏ +963- 1 332 75 72, fax: +963 11 332 75 71, damasc@mae.ro. Embassy
Serbia, Abu Romane 18. Al-Jalaa street, P.O.Box: 739, ☏ +963 11 3336222, fax: +963 11 3333690, ambasada@srbija-damask.org.
Switzerland, ☏ +963 11 611 19 72, fax: +963 11 611 19 76, dam.vertretung@eda.admin.ch.
Turkey, ☏ +963 11 335 01 930, fax: +963 11 333 92 43, turkemb.damascus@mfa.gov.tr.

## Consulates
Ireland, PO Box 46,Damascus, ☏ +963 11-3342144, fax: +963 11-2221320.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ANCIENT CITY OF DAMASCUS
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:28:05


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,888
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Old_city_of_Damascus
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The old city of Damascus (Arabic: دِمَشْق ٱلْقَدِيمَة, romanized: Dimašq al-Qadīmah) is the historic city centre of Damascus, Syria. The old city, which is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world, contains numerous archaeological sites, including some historical churches and mosques. Many cultures have left their mark, especially Hellenistic, Roman, Byzantine and Islamic. In 1979, the historical center of the city, surrounded by walls of Roman era, was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. In June 2013, UNESCO included all Syrian sites on the list of World Heritage in Danger to warn of the risks to which they are exposed because of the Syrian Civil War. Within it lies the monumental Umayyad mosque, one of the largest and oldest mosques in the world.

Origins and founding
Lying on the south bank of Barada River, the ancient city was founded in the 3rd millennium B.C. The horizontal diameter of the oval is about 1.5 km (0.93 mi) which is known as Damascus Straight Street, while the vertical diameter (Latin: Cardus Maximus) is about 1 km (0.62 mi). With an approximate area of 86.12 hectares (212.8 acres; 0.8612 square kilometres), the ancient city was enclosed within a historic wall of 4.5 km (2.8 mi) in circuit that was mainly built by the Romans, then fortified by the Ayyubids and Mamluks.

The first mentioning of Damascus was as "Ta-ms-qu" in the second millennium BC, it was situated in an Amorite region in the middle of a conflict zone between the Hittites and Egyptians. The city was tributary to these powers until the emergence of the Sea Peoples in 1200 BC whose raids helped in weakening the arch rivals. Consequently, the Semitic Arameans managed to establish the independent state of Aram-Damascus (11th century – 733 BC), naming the main city as ‘Dimashqu’ or ‘Darmeseq’.

Historical timeline
Throughout its history, Damascus has been part of the following states:

Main sights
Damascus has a wealth of historical sites dating back to many different periods of the city's history. Since the city has been built up with every passing occupation, it has become almost impossible to excavate all the ruins of Damascus that lie up to 2.4 m (8 ft) below the modern level. The Citadel of Damascus is located in the northwest corner of the Old City. The Damascus Straight Street (referred to in the conversion of St. Paul in Acts 9:11), also known as the Via Recta, was the decumanus (east–west main street) of Roman Damascus, and extended for over 1,500 m (4,900 ft). Today, it consists of the street of Bab Sharqi and the Souk Medhat Pasha, a covered market. The Bab Sharqi street is filled with small shops and leads to the old Christian quarter of Bab Tuma (St. Thomas's Gate). Medhat Pasha Souq is also a main market in Damascus and was named after Midhat Pasha, the Ottoman governor of Syria who renovated the Souk. At the end of the Bab Sharqi street, one reaches the House of Ananias, an underground chapel that was the cellar of Ananias's house. The Umayyad Mosque, also known as the Grand Mosque of Damascus, is one of the largest mosques in the world and also one of the oldest sites of continuous prayer since the rise of Islam. A shrine in the mosque is said to contain the body of St. John the Baptist. The mausoleum where Saladin was buried is located in the gardens just outside the mosque. Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque, the shrine of the youngest daughter of Husayn ibn Ali, can also be found near the Umayyad Mosque. The ancient district of Amara is also within a walking distance from these sites.

Souqs and Khans
Al-Hamidiyah Souq, built (1780–1884) during the reign of Sultan Abdul Hamid I, the largest and the central souk in Syria, located inside the old walled city of Damascus next to the Citadel. The souq is about 600 meters long and 15 meters wide, and is covered by a 10-meter-tall (33 ft) metal arch.
Midhat Pasha Souq, named after the then Ottoman governor of Syria (and later Grand Vizier) Midhat Pasha.
Al-Buzuriyah Souq, 152 metres (499 feet) in length.
Khan al-Harir, completed in 1574.
Khan Jaqmaq, completed in 1420.
Khan As'ad Pasha, completed in 1752, covering an area of 2,500 square metres (27,000 square feet). Situated along Al-Buzuriyah Souq, it was built and named after As'ad Pasha al-Azm.
Khan Sulayman Pasha, completed in 1736, named after Sulayman Pasha al-Azm.

Historic buildings
Temple of Jupiter, built by the Romans, beginning during the rule of Augustus and completed during the rule of Constantius II, previously a temple dedicated to Hadad-Ramman, the god of thunderstorms and rain.
Damascus Straight Street (Latin: Via Recta), a Roman street (Decumanus Maximus) which runs from east to west in the old city, 1,500 metres in length.
Citadel of Damascus, built (1076–1078) and (1203–1216) by Turkmen warlord Atsiz ibn Uvaq, and Al-Adil I.
Nur al-Din Bimaristan, a large medieval bimaristan ("hospital"), built and named after the Zengid Sultan Nur ad-Din in 1154.
Mausoleum of Saladin, built in 1196, the resting place and grave of the medieval Muslim Ayyubid Sultan Saladin.
Azm Palace, built in 1750 as a residence for the Ottoman governor of Damascus As'ad Pasha al-Azm.
Maktab Anbar, a mid 19th-century Jewish private mansion, restored by the Ministry of Culture in 1976 to serve as a library, exhibition centre, museum and craft workshops.
Beit al-Mamlouka, a 17th-century Damascene house, serving as a luxury boutique hotel within the old city since 2005.
Bait Al-Sibai
Bait Nizam
Bait Al-Dahdah

Madrasas
Al-Joqmoqiyya Madrasa
al-Nuriyya al-Kubra Madrasa, built in 1167 by Nūr ad-Dīn Zangī.
The Great Al-Adiliyah Madrasa, a 13th-century madrasah named after Ayyubid Al-Adil I
Al-Zahiriyah Library, established in 1277, taking its name from its founder Mamluk Sultan Baibars.
Al-Fathiyah Madrasa, built in 1743 by an Ottoman official named Fethi Al-Defterdar.
Al-Qaymariyya Madrasa
Al-Joqmoqiyya Madrasa
Al-Zahiriyah Madrasa, established in 1277, taking its name from its founder Sultan Baibars.
Al-Qilijiyah Madrasa, established in 1254.

Places of worship
Mosques
Umayyad Mosque or the Great Mosque of Damascus, a mosque built between 705 and 715 on the site of Aramean Temple of Hadad, which was converted into the Temple of Jupiter, then into a Christian basilica which was dedicated to John the Baptist (Yahya).
Sayyidah Ruqayya Mosque contains the grave of Sukayna bint Husayn, also known as Ruqayyah, the young daughter of Al-Husayn ibn ‘Alī.
Sinan Pasha Mosque an Ottoman-era mosque built in 1590, it was built upon another mosque called "Al-Basal mosque".
Al-Yaghushiyya Mosque
Al-Qali Mosque
Taftafiyya Mosque
Al-Khandaq Mosque
Al-Habbubi Mosque
Al-Bashura Mosque
Jafar Al-Saqid Mosque

Churches
House of Saint Ananias, an ancient underground structure in Damascus, Syria, that is alleged to be the remains of the home of Ananias of Damascus, where Ananias baptized Saul (who became Paul the Apostle).
Cathedral of the Dormition of Our Lady, also called "Greek-Melkite Patriarchal Cathedral of the Dormition of Our Lady", the Catholic cathedral of Melkite Greek Church.
Mariamite Cathedral of Damascus, the seat of the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch. After the Muslim conquest of Damascus the church was closed until 706 AD when al-Walid ordered to return it to the Christians as a compensation for the Church of John the Baptist which was turned into the Umayyad Mosque.
al-Zeitoun Church Greek Catholic Patriarchate and Seminary
Chapel of Saint Paul
Cathedral of Saint George
Syriac Catholic Cathedral of Saint Paul

Synagogues
Al-Faranj Synagogue
Al-Raki Synagogue
Menarsha Synagogue

Gates
The old part of the city is surrounded with thick, 4.5-kilometre-long (2.8-mile) walls, pierced by the seven historical gates, the eighth gate was added later by Muslims. These are, clockwise from the north-east side:

Bab Tuma (Gate of Thomas), dedicated to Venus.
Bab Sharqi (The Eastern Gate), dedicated to the Sun.
Bab Kisan (Kisan Gate), dedicated to Saturn.
Bab al-Saghir (also called "Goristan-e-Ghariban"), dedicated to Jupiter.
Bab al-Jabiyah (Gate of the Water Trough), dedicated to Mars.
Bab al-Faradis (The Gate of the Paradise), dedicated to Mercury.
Bab al-Salam (The Gate of Peace), dedicated to the Moon.
Bab al-Faraj (The Gate of Deliverance), a gate which was built completely after the Muslim conquest of the Levant.

Hammams
The presence of public baths (ḥammāms) in Damascus started during the Umayyad era, while some historians date them back to the Roman era. The Damascene baths were mentioned by a number of Damascus historians, such as Ibn 'Asakir (1106–1175 AD) in his famous book "The History of Damascus". In his book, Ibn 'Asakir named 77 of baths working at that time within the city. The historian Ibn Shaddad counted 114 baths located in Damascus in 1250 AD.
The number of these baths increased to 365 during the Ottoman era, then decreased drastically to reach 60 baths in the late nineteenth century AD. Today, however, the number of baths in full operation is barely 20, the most famous of them is the "Nour al-Din al-Shahid" bath in the Al-Buzuriyah Souq

Hammam Al-Malek Al-Zaher
Hammam Nour Ed-din the Martyr
Hammam Al-Bakri

Districts and subdivisions
Al-Qaymariyya
Al-Amarah Al-Jouwaniyah
Al-Amin
Jewish quarter
Bab Tuma
Al-Jourah
Al-Hariqa
Ma'azanat ash-Shahm
Shaghour al-Juwani

Preservation of the ancient city
Threats to the future of the old City
Due to the rapid decline of the population of Old Damascus (between 1995 and 2009 about 30,000 people moved out of the old city for more modern accommodation), a growing number of buildings are being abandoned or are falling into disrepair. In March 2007, the local government announced that it would be demolishing Old City buildings along a 1,400 m (4,600 ft) stretch of rampart walls as part of a redevelopment scheme. These factors resulted in the Old City being placed by the World Monuments Fund on its 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites in the world.

Current state of old Damascus
In spite of the recommendations of the UNESCO World Heritage Center:

Souq al-Atiq, a protected buffer zone, was destroyed in three days in November 2006;
King Faysal Street, a traditional hand-craft region in a protected buffer zone near the walls of Old Damascus between the Citadel and Bab Touma, is threatened by a proposed motorway.
In 2007, the Old City of Damascus and notably the district of Bab Tuma have been recognized by The World Monument Fund as one of the most endangered sites in the world.
In October 2010, Global Heritage Fund named Damascus one of 12 cultural heritage sites most "on the verge" of irreparable loss and destruction.
The old city outside of the walls of the Roman era, is also considered part of the old Damascus, however, it hasn't been given the same historical priority. During the French mandate, Michel Écochard, the French architect, planned an urban scheme for the city, that advised to only reserve the parts of the old city inside the Roman walls. This approach has been adopted later by the ruling governments of Syria, which contributed to demolishing parts of its old neighborhoods. Old houses in Sarouja, Al Midan, and Shagour Barrani was replaced by new buildings for trade mainly.

See also
Tourism in Syria
Timeline of Damascus history
List of rulers of Damascus
World Heritage Sites in Danger

References
Bibliography
Burns, Ross (2005). Damascus: A History. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-27105-9.
Finegan, Jack (1981). The archeology of the New Testament:the Mediterranean world of the early Christian Apostles. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9780709910060.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
UMAYYAD MOSQUE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: religious_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:28:13


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 7,579
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umayyad_Mosque
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Umayyad Mosque (Arabic: ٱلْجَامِع ٱلْأُمَوِي‎, romanized: al-Jāmiʿ al-Umawī), also known as the Great Mosque of Damascus (Arabic: جَامِع بَنِي أُمَيَّة ٱلْكَبِيْر‎, romanized: Jāmiʿ Banī Umayyah al-Kabīr), located in the old city of Damascus, the capital of Syria, is one of the largest and oldest mosques in the world. Its religious importance stems from the eschatological reports concerning the mosque and historic events associated with it. Christian and Muslim tradition alike consider it the burial place of John the Baptist's head, a tradition originating in the 6th century. Two shrines inside the premises commemorate the Islamic prophet Muhammad's grandson Husayn ibn Ali, whose martyrdom is frequently compared to that of John the Baptist. It is considered to be the oldest mosque still in use in its original form.
The site has been used as a house of worship since the Iron Age, when the Arameans built on it a temple dedicated to their god of rain, Hadad. It was later associated with the Greek god Zeus during the Hellenistic period. Under Roman rule after 64 CE, it was converted into the center of the imperial cult of Jupiter, the Roman god of rain, becoming one of the largest temples in Syria. The current walls of the mosque were the inner walls of the Temple of Jupiter (built in the 1st century BC to 4th century AD). When the empire in Syria transitioned to Christian Byzantine rule, Emperor Theodosius I (r. 379–395) transformed it into a cathedral and the seat of the second-highest-ranking bishop in the Patriarchate of Antioch.
After the Muslim conquest of Damascus in 634, part of the cathedral was designated as a small prayer house (musalla) for the Muslim conquerors. As the Muslim community grew, the Umayyad caliph al-Walid I (r. 705–715) confiscated the rest of the cathedral for Muslim use, returning to the Christians other properties in the city as compensation. The structure was largely demolished and a grand congregational mosque complex was built in its place. The new structure was built over nine years by thousands of laborers and artisans from across the Islamic and Byzantine empires at considerable expense and was funded by the war booty of Umayyad conquests and taxes on the Arab troops of Damascus. Unlike the simpler mosques of the time, the Umayyad Mosque had a large basilical plan with three parallel aisles and a perpendicular central nave leading from the mosque's entrance to the world's second concave mihrab (prayer niche). The mosque was noted for its rich compositions of marble paneling and its extensive gold mosaics of vegetal motifs, covering some 4,000 square metres (43,000 sq ft), likely the largest in the world. 
Under Abbasid rule (750–860), new structures were added, including the Dome of the Treasury and the Minaret of the Bride, while the Mamluks (1260–1516) undertook major restoration efforts and added the Minaret of Qaytbay. The Umayyad Mosque innovated and influenced nascent Islamic architecture by introducing a more organized and monumental design compared to earlier mosques. It enjoyed great prestige throughout its history and was regarded as a "wonder of the world" by many medieval Muslim writers. Although the original structure has been altered several times due to fire, war damage, and repairs, it is one of the few mosques to maintain the same form and architectural features of its 8th-century construction, as well as its Umayyad character.

History
Pre-Islamic period
The site of the Umayyad Mosque is attested as a place of worship since the Iron Age. Damascus was the capital of the Aramaean state Aram-Damascus and a large temple was dedicated to Hadad-Ramman, the god of thunderstorms and rain, and was erected at the site of the present-day mosque. One stone remains from the Aramaean temple, dated to the rule of King Hazael, and is currently on display in the National Museum of Damascus.
The Temple of Hadad-Ramman continued to serve a central role in the city afterwards. Under the rule of the Seleucids in the Hellenistic period, probably in the 2nd century BC, the temple was formally dedicated to the Greek god Zeus, who was assmilated to Haddad-Ramman. After the Roman Empire conquered Damascus in 64 BC, they introduced worship of the equivalent Roman god, Jupiter. Thus, they engaged in a project to reconfigure and expand the temple, probably beginning in the reign of Augustus (r. 27 BC – 14 AD). The later Damascus-born architect Apollodorus may have been involved in the design.
The new Temple of Jupiter became the center of the imperial cult of Jupiter and was served as a response to the Second Temple in Jerusalem. The Temple of Jupiter would attain further additions during the early Roman period, some funded by contributions from individuals. The temple was further renovated and embellished during the reign of Septimius Severus (r. 193–211). The remains of the western propylaeum visible today most likely date from his tme. By the 4th century, the temple was especially renowned for its size and beauty. It was separated from the city by two sets of walls. The first, outer wall spanned a wide area that included a market, and the second inner wall surrounded the actual sanctuary of Jupiter. It was the largest temple in Roman Syria.
In 391, the Temple of Jupiter was converted into a cathedral by the Christian emperor Theodosius I (r. 379–395). The church was likely one of the largest of the time. It served as the seat of the Bishop of Damascus, who ranked second within the Patriarchate of Antioch after the patriarch himself.

Umayyad construction
Foundation and construction
Damascus was captured by Muslim Arab forces led by Khalid ibn al-Walid in 634. In 661, the Islamic Caliphate came under the rule of the Umayyad dynasty, which chose Damascus to be the administrative capital of the Muslim world. The Byzantine cathedral had remained in use by the local Christians, but a prayer room (musalla) for Muslims was constructed on the southeastern part of the building. The musalla did not have the capacity to house the rapidly growing number of Muslim worshippers in Damascus. The city otherwise lacked sufficient free space for a large congregational mosque. The sixth Umayyad caliph, al-Walid I (r. 705–715), resolved to construct such a mosque on the site of the cathedral in 706.
Al-Walid personally supervised the project and had most of the cathedral, including the musalla, demolished. The construction of the mosque completely altered the layout of the building, though it preserved the outer walls of the temenos (sanctuary or inner enclosure) of the Roman-era temple. While the church (and the temples before it) had the main building located at the centre of the rectangular enclosure, the mosque's prayer hall is placed against its south wall. The architect recycled the columns and arcades of the church, dismantling and repositioning them in the new structure. Besides its use as a large congregational mosque for the Damascenes, the new house of worship was meant as a tribute to the city. 
In response to Christian protest at the move, al-Walid ordered all the other confiscated churches in the city to be returned to the Christians as compensation. The mosque was completed in 711, or in 715, shortly after al-Walid's death, by his successor, Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik (r. 715–717). According to 10th-century Persian historian Ibn al-Faqih, somewhere between 600,000 and 1,000,000 gold dinars were spent on the project. The historian Khalid Yahya Blankinship notes that the field army of Damascus, numbering some 45,000 soldiers, were taxed a quarter of their salaries for nine years to pay for its construction. Coptic craftsmen as well as Persian, Indian, Greek, and Moroccan laborers provided the bulk of the labor force which consisted of 12,000 people. The extravagant costs also attracted initial resentment among the population and criticism from some Muslim writers.     
The mosque subsequently held major religious and cultural significance throughout its history, while also having a strong influence on later Islamic architecture. It was commonly regarded as one of the "wonders of the world" by medieval Muslim authors, who praised its architecture and decoration. Some medieval authors even claim that of the five wonders the mosque ranks fourth for its superlative beauty and extraordinary cost while its decoration ranks fifth.

Layout design
The plan of the new mosque was innovative and highly influential in the history of early Islamic architecture. The earliest mosques before this had been relatively plain hypostyle structures (a flat-roof hall supported by columns), of which the Prophet's Mosque in Medina was an important model. The new mosque in Damascus introduced a more basilical plan to this model, with three parallel aisles and a perpendicular central nave. The central nave, which leads from the main entrance to the mihrab (niche in the qibla wall) and features a central dome, provided a new aesthetic focus which may have been designed to emphasize the area originally reserved for the caliph during prayers, near the mihrab. There is some uncertainty as to whether the dome was originally directly in front of the mihrab (as in many later mosques) or in its current position mid-way along the central nave. Scholars have attributed the design of the mosque's plan to the influences of Byzantine Christian basilicas in the region. Rafi Grafman and Myriam Rosen-Ayalon have argued that the first Umayyad Al-Aqsa Mosque built in Jerusalem, begun by Abd al-Malik (al-Walid's father) and now replaced by later constructions, had a layout very similar to the current Umayyad Mosque in Damascus and that it probably served as a model for the latter.
The mosque initially had no minaret towers, as this feature of mosque architecture was not established until later. However, at least two of the corners of the mosque's outer wall had short towers, platforms, or roof shelters which were used by the muezzin to issue the call to prayer (adhān), constituting a type of proto-minaret. These features were referred to as a mi'd͟hana ("place of the adhān") or as a ṣawma῾a ("monk's cell", due to their small size) in historical Arabic sources. Arabic sources indicated that they were former Roman towers which already stood at the corners of the temenos before the mosque's construction and were simply left intact and reused after construction.

Decoration
The mosque was richly decorated. A rich composition of marble paneling covered the lower walls, though only minor examples of the original marbles have survived today near the east gate. The walls of the prayer hall were raised above the level of the old temenos walls, which allowed for new windows to be inserted in the upper walls. The windows had ornately carved grilles that foreshadowed the styles of windows in later Islamic architecture.
The most celebrated decorative element of all was the revetment of mosaics, which originally covered much of the courtyard and the interior hall. The best-preserved remains are still visible in the courtyard today.
By some estimates, the original mosque had the largest area of gold mosaics in the world, covering approximately 4,000 square metres (43,000 sq ft). The mosaics depict landscapes and buildings in a characteristic late Roman style. They reflected a wide variety of artistic styles used by mosaicists and painters since the 1st century CE, but the combined use of all these different styles in the same place was innovative at the time. Similar to the Dome of the Rock, built earlier by Abd al-Malik, vegetation and plants were the most common motif, but those of the Damascus mosque are more naturalistic. In addition to the large landscape depictions, a mosaic frieze with an intricate vine motif (referred to as the karma in Arabic historical sources) once ran around the walls of the prayer hall, above the level of the mihrab. The only notable omission is the absence of human and animal figures, which was likely a new restriction imposed by the Muslim patron. 

Historical Arabic sources, often written in later centuries, suggest that both the craftsmen and the materials employed to create the mosque's mosaics were imported from the Byzantine capital of Constantinople. The 12th-century historian Ibn Asakir claimed that al-Walid pressured the Byzantine emperor into sending him 200 craftsmen by threatening to destroy all churches inside Umayyad territory if he refused. Many scholars, based on such evidence from Arabic sources, have accepted a Byzantine (Constantinopolitan) origin for the mosaics, while some, such as Creswell, have interpreted the story as a later embellishment of Muslim historians with a symbolic political significance.
Art historian Finbarr Barry Flood notes that historical sources report many other apparent gifts of artisans and materials from the Byzantine emperors to the Umayyad caliphs and other rulers, probably reflecting a widespread admiration for Byzantine craftsmanship that continued in the early Islamic period. He notes that while Byzantine influence is indeed apparent in the mosque's mosaic imagery, there are multiple ways in which Byzantine mosaicists could have contributed to its production, including a collaboration with local craftsmen. Some scholars argue that the mosaic techniques in both the Dome of the Rock and the Umayyad Mosque, including their distinctive colour scheme, are more clearly consistent with the craftsmanship of Syro-Palestinian or Egyptian mosaicists. Archeologist Judith McKenzie suggests that the mosaics could have been designed by local artisans who oversaw their production, while any mosaicists sent from Constantinople could have been working under their supervision. A recent 2022 study of the chemical composition of mosaic tesserae in the Umayyad Mosque concluded that the majority were produced in Egypt around the time of the mosque's construction, matching other recent studies of samples from the Dome of the Rock and Khirbat al-Majfar that came to the same conclusion.

Scholars have long debated the meaning of the mosaic imagery. Some historical Muslim writers and some modern scholars have interpreted them as a topographical representation of all the cities in the known world (or within the Umayyad world), some have interpreted them as a representation of Damascus itself and the Barada River, and other scholars interpret them as a depiction of Paradise. The earliest known interpretation of the mosaics is by the 10th-century geographer al-Muqaddasi, who suggested a topographical meaning, commenting that "there is hardly a tree or a notable town that has not been pictured on these walls." An early example of the Paradise interpretation dates from the writings of Ibn al-Najjar in the 12th century. This interpretation has been favoured by more recent scholarship. Some of the Qur'anic inscriptions that were originally present on the qibla wall of the mosque, mentioning the Day of Judgment and promising the reward of a heavenly garden (al-janna), may support this interpretation. Another clue is an account by historian Ibn Zabala in 814, which reports that one of the mosaicists who worked for al-Walid's reconstruction of the Prophet's Mosque in Medina (contemporary with the construction in Damascus) directly explained the mosaics there as a reproduction of the trees and palaces of Paradise, which suggests that the contemporary Umayyad mosaics in Damascus had the same intention.
In this interpretation, the lack of human figures in these scenes possibly represents a Paradise that stands empty until the arrival of its human inhabitants at the end of time. Other motifs in the mosaics have been cited to support a paradisal meaning and the imagery has been compared with both the descriptions of Paradise in the Qur'an and the earlier iconography of paradisal imagery in Late Antique art. According to Judith McKenzie, there is a similarity between certain architectural elements depicted in the Umayyad mosaics and those shown in Pompeian frescoes (such as broken pediments and tholoi with tented roofs and Corinthian columns), as well as some early Christian and Byzantine art, which are most likely depictions of the architecture of Hellenistic Alexandria. In Roman and Late Antique art, Alexandrian and Egyptian landscapes had a paradisal connotation. McKenzie argues that the Umayyad mosaics, extending these traditions, can thus be understood as a depiction of Paradise. The possibility also remains that the mosaic scenes combine more than one of these meanings at the same time; for example, by using paradisal imagery to represent Damascus or the Umayyad realm as an idealized, earthly paradise.

The mihrab
The original mihrab was one of the first concave mihrabs in the Islamic world, the second one known to exist after the one created in 706–707 during al-Walid's reconstruction of the Prophet's Mosque in Medina. The exact appearance of the mosque's original main mihrab is uncertain, due to the multiple repairs and restorations that took place over the centuries. Ibn Jubayr, who visited the mosque in 1184, described the inside of the mihrab as filled with miniature blind arcades whose arches resembled "small mihrabs", each filled with inlaid mother-of-pearl mosaics and framed by spiral columns of marble. This mihrab was famed across the Islamic world for its beauty, as noted by other writers of the era.
Its appearance may have been imitated by other surviving mihrabs built under the Mamluk sultans al-Mansur Qalawun and al-Nasir Muhammad in the 13th and 14th centuries, such as the richly decorated mihrab of Qalawun's mausoleum in Cairo (completed in 1285). Scholars generally assume that the mihrab described by Ibn Jubayr dated from a restoration of the mosque in 1082. Another restoration occurred after 1401 and this version, which survived until another fire in 1893, was again decorated with miniature arcades, while its semi-dome was filled with coffering similar to Roman architecture. Finbarr Barry Flood has suggested that the perpetuation of the mihrab's arcaded decoration across several restorations indicates that the medieval restorations were aimed at preserving at least some of the original mihrab's appearance, and therefore the 8th-century Umayyad mihrab may have had these features.

Abbasid and Fatimid era
Following the toppling of the Umayyads in 750, the Abbasid dynasty came to power and moved the capital of the Caliphate to Baghdad. Apart from the attention given for strategic and commercial purposes, the Abbasids had no interest in Damascus. Thus, the Umayyad Mosque reportedly suffered under their rule, with little recorded building activity between the 8th and 10th centuries. However, the Abbasids did consider the mosque to be a major symbol of Islam's triumph, and thus it was spared the systematic eradication of the Umayyad legacy in the city. In 789–90 the Abbasid governor of Damascus, al-Fadl ibn Salih ibn Ali, constructed the Dome of the Treasury with the purpose of housing the mosque's funds. The so-called Dome of the Clock, standing in the eastern part of the courtyard, may have also been erected originally by the same Abbasid governor in 780. The 10th-century Jerusalemite geographer al-Muqaddasi credited the Abbasids for building the northern minaret (Madhanat al-Arous, meaning 'Minaret of the Bride') of the mosque in 831 during the reign of Caliph al-Ma'mun (r. 813–833). This was accompanied by al-Ma'mun's removal and replacement of Umayyad inscriptions in the mosque.
By the early 10th century, a monumental water clock had been installed by the entrance in the western part of the southern wall of the mosque, which was consequently known as Bab al-Sa'a ('Gate of the Clock') at the time but is known today as Bab al-Ziyada. This clock seems to have stopped functioning by the middle of the 12th century. Abbasid rule over Syria began crumbling during the early 10th century, and in the decades that followed, it came under the control of autonomous realms who were only nominally under Abbasid authority. The Fatimids of Egypt, who adhered to Shia Islam, conquered Damascus in 970, but few recorded improvements of the mosque were undertaken by the new rulers. The Umayyad Mosque's prestige allowed the residents of Damascus to establish the city as a center for Sunni intellectualism, enabling them to maintain relative independence from Fatimid religious authority. In 1069, large sections of the mosque, particularly the northern wall, were destroyed in a fire as a result of an uprising by the city's residents against the Fatimids' Berber army who were garrisoned there.

Seljuk and Ayyubid era
The Sunni Muslim Seljuk Turks gained control of the city in 1078 and restored the nominal rule of the Abbasid Caliphate. The Seljuk ruler Tutush (r. 1079–1095) initiated the repair of damage caused by the 1069 fire. In 1082, his vizier, Abu Nasr Ahmad ibn Fadl, had the central dome restored in a more spectacular form; the two piers supporting it were reinforced and the original Umayyad mosaics of the northern inner façade were renewed. The northern riwaq ('portico') was rebuilt in 1089. The Seljuk atabeg of Damascus, Toghtekin (r. 1104–1128), repaired the northern wall in 1110 and two inscribed panels located above its doorways were dedicated to him. In 1113, the Seljuk atabeg of Mosul, Sharaf al-Din Mawdud (r. 1109–1113), was assassinated in the Umayyad Mosque. As the conflict between Damascus and the Crusaders intensified in the mid-12th century, the mosque was used as a principal rallying point calling on Muslims to defend the city and return Jerusalem to Muslim hands. Prominent imams, including Ibn Asakir, preached a spiritual jihad ('struggle') and when the Crusaders advanced towards Damascus in 1148, the city's residents heeded their calls; the Crusader army withdrew as a result of their resistance.

During the reign of the Zengid ruler Nur ad-Din Zangi, which began in 1154, a second monumental clock, the Jayrun Water Clock, was built on his personal orders. It was constructed outside the eastern entrance to the mosque, called Bab Jayrun, by the architect Muhammad al-Sa'ati, was rebuilt by al-Sa'ati following a fire in 1167, and was eventually repaired by his son, Ridwan, in the early 13th century. It may have survived into the 14th century. The Arab geographer al-Idrisi visited the mosque in 1154.
Damascus witnessed the establishment of several religious institutions under the Ayyubids, but the Umayyad Mosque retained its place as the center of religious life in the city. Muslim traveler Ibn Jubayr described the mosque as containing many different zawaya (religious lodges) for religious and Quranic studies. In 1173, the northern wall of the mosque was damaged again by the fire and was rebuilt by the Ayyubid sultan, Saladin (r. 1174–1193), along with the Minaret of the Bride, which had been destroyed in the 1069 fire. During the internal feuds between later Ayyubid princes, the city was dealt a great deal of damage, and the mosque's eastern minaret—known as the 'Minaret of Jesus'—was destroyed at the hands of as-Salih Ayyub of Egypt while besieging as-Salih Ismail of Damascus in 1245. The minaret was later rebuilt with little decoration. Saladin, along with many of his successors, were buried around the Umayyad Mosque (see Mausoleum of Saladin).

Mamluk era
The Mongols, under the leadership of the Nestorian Christian Kitbuqa, with the help of some submitted Western Christian forces, captured Damascus from the Ayyubids in 1260 while Kitbuqa's superior Hulagu Khan had returned to the Mongol Empire for other business. Bohemond VI of Antioch, one of the Western Christian generals in the invasion, ordered Catholic Mass to be performed in the Umayyad Mosque. However, the Muslim Mamluks of Egypt, led by Sultan Qutuz and Baybars, wrested control of the city from the Mongols later in the same year, killing Kitbuqa in the Battle of Ain Jalut, and the purpose of the Mosque was returned from Christian to its original Islamic function. In 1270, Baybars, by now sultan, ordered extensive restorations to the mosque, particularly its marble, mosaics and gildings. According to Baybars' biographer, Ibn Shaddad, the restorations cost the sultan 20,000 dinars. Among the largest mosaic fragments restored was a 34.5 by 7.3 metres (113 by 24 ft) segment in the western portico called the "Barada panel". The mosaics that decorated the mosque were a specific target of the restoration project and they had a major influence on Mamluk architecture in Syria and Egypt.
In 1285, the Hanbali scholar Ibn Taymiyya started teaching Qur'an exegesis in the mosque. When the Ilkhanid Mongols under Ghazan invaded the city in 1300, Ibn Taymiyya preached jihad, urging the citizens of Damascus to resist their occupation. The Mamluks under Sultan Qalawun drove out the Mongols later that year. When Qalawun's forces entered the city, the Mongols attempted to station several catapults in the Umayyad Mosque because the Mamluks had started fires around the citadel to prevent Mongol access to it. The attempt failed as the Mamluks burned the catapults before they were placed in the mosque.
The Mamluk viceroy of Syria, Tankiz, carried out restoration work in the mosque in 1326–1328. He reassembled the mosaics on the qibla wall and replaced all the marble tiles in the prayer hall. Sultan al-Nasir Muhammad also undertook major restoration work for the mosque in 1328. He demolished and completely rebuilt the unstable qibla wall and moved the Bab al-Ziyadah gate to the east. Much of that work was damaged during a fire that burned the mosque in 1339. Islamic art expert, Finbarr Barry Flood, describes the Bahri Mamluks' attitude towards the mosque as an "obsessive interest" and their efforts at maintaining, repairing, and restoring the mosque were unparalleled in any other period of Muslim rule. The Arab astronomer Ibn al-Shatir worked as the chief muwaqqit ('religious timekeeper') and the chief muezzin at the Umayyad Mosque from 1332 until he died in 1376. He erected a large sundial on the mosque's northern minaret in 1371, now lost. A replica was installed in its place in the modern period. The Minaret of Jesus was burnt down in a fire in 1392.
The Mongol conqueror Timur besieged Damascus in 1400. He ordered the burning of the city on 17 March 1401, and the fire ravaged the Umayyad Mosque. The eastern minaret was reduced to rubble, and the central dome collapsed. Another fire damaged the mosque in October 1479, causing the Mamluk sultan Qaytbay (r. 1468–1496) to sponsor repair works. This included the reconstruction of the southwestern minaret in 1488.

Ottoman era
Damascus was conquered from the Mamluks by the Ottoman Empire under Sultan Selim I in 1516. The first Friday prayer performed in Selim's name in the Umayyad Mosque was attended by the sultan himself. The Ottomans used an endowment system (waqf) for religious sites as a means to link the local population with the central authority. The waqf of the Umayyad Mosque was the largest in the city, employing 596 people. Supervisory and clerical positions were reserved for Ottoman officials while religious offices were held mostly by members of the local ulema (Muslim scholars). Although the awqaf (plural of "waqf") were taxed, the waqf of the Umayyad Mosque was exempted from taxation. In 1518, the Ottoman governor of Damascus and supervisor of the mosque's waqf, Janbirdi al-Ghazali, had the mosque repaired and redecorated as part of his architectural reconstruction program for the city.
The prominent Sufi scholar Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi taught regularly at the Umayyad Mosque starting in 1661.
The khatib (preacher) of the Umayyad Mosque was one of the three most influential religious officials in Ottoman Damascus, the other two being the Hanafi mufti and the naqib al-ashraf. He served as a link between the imperial government in Constantinople and the elites of Damascus and was a key shaper of public opinion in the city. By 1650 members of the mercantile and scholarly Mahasini family held the position, retaining it for much of the 18th and early and mid-19th centuries, partly due to their links with the Shaykh al-Islam in the imperial capital. In the late 19th century, another Damascene family with connections in Constantinople, the Khatibs, vied for the position. After the death of the Mahasini preacher in 1869, a member of the Khatibs succeeded him.
The mosque's prayer hall was once again ravaged and partly destroyed by fire in 1893. A laborer engaging in repair work accidentally started the fire when he was smoking his nargila (water pipe). The fire destroyed the inner fabric of the prayer hall and caused the collapse of the mosque's central dome. The Ottomans fully restored the mosque, largely maintaining the original layout. The restoration process, which lasted nine years, did not attempt to reproduce the original decoration. The central mihrab was replaced and the dome was rebuilt in a contemporary Ottoman style. The rubble and damaged elements from the fire, including some of the original pillars and mosaic remains, were simply disposed of.

Until 1899 the mosque's library included the "very old" Qubbat al-Khazna collection; "most of its holdings were given to the German emperor Wilhelm II and only a few pieces kept for the National Archives in Damascus."
It is the burial place of the first three officers of the Ottoman Aviation Squadrons who died on mission, in this case the Istanbul-Cairo expedition in 1914. They were Navy Lieutenant Fethi Bey and his navigator, Artillery First Lieutenant Sadık Bey and Artillery Second Lieutenant Nuri Bey.

Modern era
The Umayyad Mosque underwent major restorations in 1929 during the French Mandate over Syria and in 1954 and 1963 under the Syrian Republic.
In the 1980s and in the early 1990s, Syrian president Hafez al-Assad ordered a wide-scale renovation of the mosque. The methods and concepts of Assad's restoration project were heavily criticized by UNESCO, but the general approach in Syria was that the mosque was more of a symbolic monument rather than a historical one and thus, its renovation could only enhance the mosque's symbolism.
In 1990s, Mohammed Burhanuddin constructed a zarih of the martyrs of the Battle of Karbala, whose heads were brought to the Mosque after their defeat at the hands of the then Umayyad caliph, Yazid I.
In 2001, Pope John Paul II visited the mosque, primarily to visit the relics of John the Baptist. It was the first time a pope paid a visit to a mosque.
On March 15, 2011, the first significant protests related to the Arab Spring and eventually the Syrian civil war began at the Umayyad Mosque when 40–50 worshippers gathered outside the complex and chanted pro-democracy slogans. Syrian security forces swiftly quelled the protests and cordoned off the area during Friday prayers to prevent large-scale demonstrations.

After the Fall of the Assad regime and the victory of opposition forces in the civil war, Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham leader Ahmed al-Sharaa gave a victory speech from Umayyad Mosque during which he declared a new era in Syria's history.

Architecture
The ground plan of the Umayyad Mosque is rectangular in shape and measures 97 meters (318 ft) by 156 meters (512 ft). A large courtyard occupies the northern part of the mosque complex, while the prayer hall or haram ('sanctuary') covers the southern part. The mosque is enclosed by four exterior walls which were part of the temenos of the original Roman temple.

Sanctuary
Three arcades make up the interior space of the sanctuary. They are parallel to the direction of prayer which is towards Mecca. The arcades are supported by two rows of stone Corinthian columns. Each of the arcades contain two levels. The first level consists of large semi-circular arches, while the second level is made up of double arches. This pattern is the same repeated by the arcades of the courtyard. The three interior arcades intersect in the center of the sanctuary with a larger, higher arcade that is perpendicular to the qibla wall and faces the mihrab and the minbar. The central transept divides the arcades into two halves each with eleven arches. The entire sanctuary measures 136 meters (446 ft) by 37 meters (121 ft) and takes up the southern half of the mosque complex.
Four mihrabs line the sanctuary's rear wall, the main one being the Great Mihrab which is located roughly at the center of the wall. The Mihrab of the Sahaba, named after the sahaba ('companions of Muhammad') is situated in the eastern half. According to the 9th-century Muslim engineer Musa ibn Shakir, the latter mihrab was built during the mosque's initial construction and it became the third niche-formed mihrab in Islam's history.
The central dome of the mosque is known as the 'Dome of the Eagle' (Qubbat an-Nisr) and located atop the center of the prayer hall. The original wooden dome was replaced by one built of stone following the 1893 fire. It receives its name because it is thought to resemble an eagle, with the dome itself being the eagle's head while the eastern and western flanks of the prayer hall represent the wings. With a height of 36 meters (118 ft), the dome rests on an octagonal substructure with two arched windows on each of its sides. It is supported by the central interior arcade and has openings along its parameter.

Courtyard
In the courtyard (sahn), the level of the stone pavement had become uneven over time due to several repairs throughout the mosque's history. Recent work on the courtyard has restored it to its consistent Umayyad-era levels. Arcades (riwaq) surround the courtyard supported by alternating stone columns and piers. There is one pier in between every two columns. Because the northern part of the courtyard had been destroyed in an earthquake in 1759, the arcade is not consistent; when the northern wall was rebuilt the columns that were supporting it were not. The courtyard and its arcades contain the largest preserved remnants of the mosque's Umayyad-era mosaic decoration.
Several domed pavilions stand in the courtyard. The Dome of the Treasury is an octagonal structure decorated with mosaics, standing on eight Roman columns in the western part of the courtyard. Its 8th-century mosaics were largely remade in the late 20th-century restoration. In a mirror position on the other side of the courtyard is the Dome of the Clock, another octagonal domed pavilion. Near the middle of the courtyard, sheltering an ablutions fountain at ground level, is a rectangular pavilion which is a modern reconstruction of a late Ottoman pavilion.

Minarets
Within the Umayyad Mosque complex are three minarets. The Minaret of Isa on the southeast corner, the Minaret of Qaytbay (also called Madhanat al-Gharbiyya) on the southwest corner, and the Minaret of the Bride located along the northern wall.

Minaret of the Bride
The Minaret of the Bride was the first one built and is located on the mosque's northern wall. The exact year of the minaret's original construction is unknown. The bottom part of the minaret most likely dates back to the Abbasid era in the 9th century. While it is possible that the Umayyads built it, there is no indication that a minaret on the northern wall was a part of al-Walid I's initial concept. Al-Muqaddasi visited the minaret in 985 when Damascus was under Abbasid control and described it as "recently built". The upper segment was constructed in 1174. This minaret is used by the muezzin for the call to prayer (adhan) and there is a spiral staircase of 160 stone steps that lead to the muezzin's calling position.
The Minaret of the Bride is divided into two sections; the main tower and the spire which are separated by a lead roof. The oldest part of the minaret, or the main tower, is square in shape, has four galleries, and consists of two different forms of masonry; the base consists of large blocks, while the upper section is built of dressed stone. There are two light openings near the top of the main tower, before the roof, with horseshoe arches and cubical capitals enclosed in a single arch. A smaller arched corbel is located below these openings. According to local legend, the minaret is named after the daughter of the merchant who provided the lead for the minaret's roof who was married to Syria's ruler at the time. Attached to the Minaret of the Bride is the 18th-century replica of the 14th-century sundial built by Ibn al-Shatir.

Minaret of Isa
The Minaret of Isa is around 77 meters (253 ft) in height and the tallest of the three minarets. Some sources claim it was originally built by the Abbasids in the 9th century. The main body of the current minaret was built by the Ayyubids in 1247, but the upper section was constructed by the Ottomans. The main body of the minaret is square-shaped and the spire is octagonal. It tapers to a point and is surmounted by a crescent (as are the other two minarets). Two covered galleries are situated in the main body and two open galleries are located on the spire. Islamic belief holds that Isa (Jesus) will descend from heaven during the time of the Fajr prayer and will pray behind the Mahdi. He will then confront the Antichrist. According to local Damascene tradition, relating from hadith, Isa will reach earth via the Minaret of Isa, hence its name. Ibn Kathir, a prominent 14th-century Muslim scholar, backed this notion.

Minaret of Qaytbay
The Minaret of Qaytbay was built by Qaytbay in 1488. He also commissioned its renovation due to the 1479 fire. The minaret displays strong Islamic-era Egyptian architectural influence typical of the Mamluk period. It is octagonal in shape and built in receding sections with three galleries. It is generally believed that both the Minaret of Jesus and the Western Minaret were built on the foundation of ancient Roman towers. In October 2025, nearly one year after the fall of the Assad regime, the name of Hafez al-Assad, which had been inscribed on the Qaytbay Minaret following earlier restoration works, was removed.

Influence on mosque architecture
The Umayyad Mosque is one of the few early mosques in the world to have maintained the same general structure and architectural features since its initial construction in the early 8th century. Its Umayyad character has not been significantly altered. Since its establishment, the mosque has served as a model for congregational mosque architecture in Syria as well as globally. According to Flood, "the construction of the Damascus mosque not only irrevocably altered the urban landscape of the city, inscribing upon it a permanent affirmation of Muslim hegemony, but by giving the Syrian congregational mosque its definitive form it also transformed the subsequent history of the mosque in general." The influence of the Umayyad Mosque's ground plan can be found in many mosques in the historic Muslim world, such as the al-Azhar Mosque and Baybars Mosque in Cairo, the Great Mosque of Cordoba in Spain, and the Bursa Grand Mosque and Edirne's Grand Mosque in Turkey.

Religious significance
According to some, the mosque is the fourth holiest site of Islam. A Christian tradition dating to the 6th century developed an association between the former cathedral structure and John the Baptist. Legend had it that his head was buried there. Ibn al-Faqih relays that during the construction of the mosque, workers found a cave-chapel which had a box containing the head of John the Baptist, known as Yahya ibn Zakariya by Muslims. Upon learning of that and examining it, al-Walid I ordered the head buried under a specific pillar in the mosque that was later inlaid with marble.
According to one hadith reported by Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj, the Great Mosque of Damascus is the site where Jesus will descend from heaven at his Second Coming, appearing on a "white minaret". Most Muslim theologians interpret this passage as symbolic rather than literal. In a study of Muslim sources, William Richard Oakes suggests that some aspects of this hadith could date from the late Umayyad period, when the mosque was built, rather than from Muhammad's time, when Damascus had not yet been conquered by Muslims.
Two shrines commemorating the Islamic prophet Muhammad's grandson Husayn ibn Ali, whose martyrdom is also compared in Shi'a tradition to that of John the Baptist, exist within the building premises.

See also
Ablaq
Great Mosque of Aleppo
List of the oldest mosques in the world
Religious significance of the Syrian region
Timeline of Islamic history
History of medieval Arabic and Western European domes

Notes
References
Bibliography
Abdulkarim, Maamoun (2003). "Syria in the times of Apollodorus of Damascus". In Calcani, Giuliana (ed.). Apollodorus of Damascus and Trajan's Column: from tradition to project. L'Erma di Bretschneider. ISBN 88-8265-233-5.
Ali, Wijdan (1999). The Arab Contribution to Islamic Art: from the Seventh to the Fifteenth Centuries. American University in Cairo Press. ISBN 978-977-424-476-6.
"American Architect and Architecture". American Architect and Architecture. XLIII (945). J. R. Osgood & Co: 57–58. 1894.
Berney, K. A.; Ring, Trudy (1996). International Dictionary of Historic Places, Volume 4: Middle East and Africa. Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers. ISBN 1-884964-03-6.
Blankinship, Khalid Yahya (1994). The End of the Jihâd State: The Reign of Hishām ibn ʻAbd al-Malik and the Collapse of the Umayyads. Albany, New York: State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-1827-7.
Bowersock, Glen Warren; Brown, Peter Lamont (2001). Interpreting Late Antiquity: Essays on the Postclassical World. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-00598-8.
Brinner, William M., ed. (1963). A Chronicle of Damascus, 1389–1397. University of California Press.
Burns, Ross (2009) [1992]. The Monuments of Syria: A Guide. I.B. Tauris. ISBN 9781845119478.
Burns, Ross (2007) [2005]. Damascus: a History (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-27105-9. OCLC 648281269.
Burns, Ross (2005), Damascus: A History, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-27105-3.
Charette, François (2003). Mathematical Instrumentation in Fourteenth-Century Egypt and Syria: The Illustrated Treatise of Najm al-Dīn al-Mīṣrī. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-13015-9.
Cooke, Miriam (2007). Dissident Syria: Making Oppositional Arts Official. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-4016-4.
Darke, Diana (2010). Syria (2nd ed.). Chalfont St Peter: Bradt Travel Guides. ISBN 978-1-84162-314-6. OCLC 501398372.
Degeorge, Gérard (2004). Damascus. Flammarion. ISBN 2080304569.
Dumper, Michael; Stanley, Bruce E. (2007). Cities of the Middle East and North Africa: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-919-5.
Elisséeff, Nikita (1965). "Dimashk". In Lewis, B.; Pellat, Ch. & Schacht, J. (eds.). The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Volume II: C–G. Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp. 277–291. OCLC 495469475.
Enderlein, Volkmar (2011). "Syria and Palestine: The Umayyad Caliphate". In Hattstein, Markus; Delius, Peter (eds.). Islam: Art and Architecture. H. F. Ullmann. pp. 58–87. ISBN 9783848003808.
Ettinghausen, Richard; Grabar, Oleg; Jenkins-Madina, Marilyn (2001). Islamic Art and Architecture: 650–1250 (2nd ed.). Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300088670.
Fehérvári, G. (1993). "Miḥrāb". In Bosworth, C. E.; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W. P. & Pellat, Ch. (eds.). The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Volume VII: Mif–Naz. Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp. 7–15. ISBN 978-90-04-09419-2.
Finkel, Caroline (2005). Osman's Dream: The Story of the Ottoman Empire, 1300–1923. Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-02396-7.
Fischel, Walter Joseph (1952). Ibn Khaldūn and Tamerlane: Their Historic Meeting in Damascus, 1401 A.D. (803 A.H.) A Study Based on Arabic Manuscripts of Ibn Khaldūn's "Autobiography". University of California Press.
Flood, Finbarr Barry (1997). "Umayyad Survivals and Mamluk Revivals: Qalawunid Architecture and the Great Mosque of Damascus". Muqarnas. 14. Boston: Brill: 57–79. doi:10.2307/1523236. JSTOR 1523236.
Flood, Finbarr Barry (2001). The Great Mosque of Damascus: Studies on the Makings of an Umayyad Visual Culture. Boston: Brill. ISBN 90-04-11638-9.
George, Alain (2021). The Umayyad Mosque of Damascus: Art, Faith and Empire in Early Islam. London: Gingko Library. ISBN 9781909942455.
Grafman, Rafi; Rosen-Ayalon, Myriam (1999). "The Two Great Syrian Umayyad Mosques: Jerusalem and Damascus". Muqarnas. 16. Boston: Brill: 1–15. doi:10.2307/1523262. JSTOR 1523262.
Hitti, Phillip K. (October 2002). History of Syria: Including Lebanon and Palestine. Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias Press LLC. ISBN 978-1-931956-60-4.
Kafescioǧlu, Çiǧdem (1999). ""In The Image of Rūm": Ottoman Architectural Patronage in Sixteenth-Century Aleppo and Damascus". Muqarnas. 16. Brill: 70–96. doi:10.2307/1523266. JSTOR 1523266.
Kamal Ed-Din, Noha, ed. (2002). The Islamic view of Jesus. Translated by Tamir Abu As-Su'ood Muhammad. Dar al-Manarah. ISBN 977-6005-08-X.
Khoury, Philip S. (1983). Urban Notables and Arab Nationalism: The Politics of Damascus 1860-1920. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-24796-9.
Kleiner, Fred (2013). Gardner's Art through the Ages, Vol. I. Cengage Learning. ISBN 9781111786441.
Le Strange, Guy (1890), Palestine Under the Moslems: A Description of Syria and the Holy Land from A.D. 650 to 1500, Committee of the Palestine Exploration Fund
Mannheim, Ivan (2001). Syria & Lebanon Handbook: The Travel Guide. Footprint Travel Guides. ISBN 1-900949-90-3.
McKenzie, Judith (2007). The architecture of Alexandria and Egypt, c. 300 B.C. to A.D. 700. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11555-0. OCLC 873228274.
Palestine Exploration Fund (1897). Quarterly statement. Published at the Fund's Office. (Ibn Jubayr: p. 240 ff)
Rivoira, Giovanni Teresio (1918). Moslem Architecture: Its Origins and Development. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9788130707594. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Rosenwein, Barbara H. (2014). A Short History of the Middle Ages. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 9781442606142.
Rudolff, Britta (2006). 'Intangible' and 'Tangible' Heritage: A Topology of Culture in Contexts of Faith (PhD). Johannes Gutenberg-University of Mainz.
Selin, Helaine, ed. (1997). Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures. Springer. ISBN 978-0-7923-4066-9.
Totah, Faedah M. (2009). "Return to the Origin: Negotiating the Modern and Unmodern in the Old City of Damascus". City & Society. 21 (1): 58–81. doi:10.1111/j.1548-744X.2009.01015.x.
Walker, Bethany J. (March 2004). "Commemorating the Sacred Spaces of the Past: The Mamluks and the Umayyad Mosque at Damascus". Near Eastern Archaeology. 67 (1). The American Schools of Oriental Research: 26–39. doi:10.2307/4149989. JSTOR 4149989. S2CID 164031578.
Winter, Michael; Levanoni, Amalia (2004). The Mamluks in Egyptian and Syrian Politics and Society. Brill. ISBN 90-04-13286-4.
Van Leeuwen, Richard (1999). Waqfs and Urban Structures: The Case of Ottoman Damascus. Brill. ISBN 90-04-11299-5.
Wolff, Richard (2007). The Popular Encyclopedia of World Religions: A User-Friendly Guide to Their Beliefs, History, and Impact on Our World Today. Harvest House Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7369-2007-0.
Zaimeche, Salah; Ball, Lamaan (2005). Damascus. Manchester: Foundation for Science Technology and Culture.

External links

Christian Sahner, "A Glistening Crossroads," The Wall Street Journal, 17 July 2010 Archived 30 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine
For freely downloadable, high-resolution photographs of the Umayyad Mosque (for teaching, research, cultural heritage work, and publication) by archaeologists, visit Manar al-Athar Archived 2020-01-23 at the Wayback Machine
Umayyad Mosque – Discover Islamic Art – Virtual Museum


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 4,378
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AC%D8%A7%D9%85%D8%B9_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%A3%D9%85%D9%88%D9%8A_(%D8%AF%D9%85%D8%B4%D9%82)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

جامع بني أمية الكبير، ويعرف اختصارًا بالجامع الأموي، هو المسجد الذي أمر الوليد بن عبد الملك بتشييده في دمشق، وهو من أشهر المساجد وأفخمها، وأحد عجائب الإسلام السبعة في العالم.
بدأ بناء الجامع الأموي في عام 705م على يد الوليد بن عبد الملك، وقد حشد له صنّاعاً من الفرس والهنود، وأوفد إمبراطور بيزنطة مئة فنان يوناني للمشاركة في التزيين، ونال قسطًا وافرًا من المدح والوصف، لا سيَّما من الرحالة والمؤرخين والأدباء الذين مرّوا بدمشق عبر العصور وأطروا بشكل خاص على زينة سقف المسجد وجدرانه الفسيفسائية الملونة، والرخام المستعمل في البناء. إلا أن أغلبها طُمس بناءً على فتاوى بعدم جوزاها حتى أُعيد اكتشافها وترميمها عام 1928. وقد وصفها المؤرخ فيليب حتي بأنها «تمثل الصناعة الأهلية السورية وليس الفن اليوناني أو البيزنطي.»
يتميز الجامع الأموي أيضًا بكونه أول مسجد ظهر فيه المحراب والحنية نتيجة طراز البناء الذي كان يشكل كنيسة يوحنا المعمدان سابقاً. أما مئذنته الشمالية، وهي أقدم مآذنه الثلاث، فتعود لعهد الوليد بن عبد الملك. كما استخدمت أيضاً منارةً لمدينة دمشق، وكانت ستعمل خلال القرون الوسطى للمنقطين للتأمل والصلاة، ومنها انتشر نموذج المئذنة المربعة إلى سائر أنحاء سوريا وشمال إفريقيا والأندلس.
يحتوي الجامع على مدفن جسد يوحنا المعمدان -النبي يحيى- نسيب المسيح، ولم يبقَ من آثاره المسيحية سوى جرن العماد ونقش باليونانية في مدح المسيح على أحد الجدران. كما يحوي المسجد أيضاً على الفتحة التي وضع فيها رأس الحسين بن علي حين حُمل إلى دمشق. وأُلحق بالمسجد مقبرة تضم رفات صلاح الدين الأيوبي.
احترقت أجزاء من الجامع ثلاث مرات: الأولى عام 1069م، والثانية على يد تيمورلنك عام 1400م، والثالثة عام 1893م. وكانت آخر عمليات الترميم في العصر الحديث عام 1994م.

الموقع
يقع الجامع الأموي في وسط مدينة دمشق القديمة، المنطقة المدرجة على لائحة التراث العالمي.

التاريخ
قبل الإسلام
يعود تاريخ المسجد الأموي في سورية إلى 1200 سنة قبل الميلاد، حيث كانت دمشق عاصمة لدولة آرام دمشق خلال العصر الحديدي. وقد كان آراميو غرب سوريا يعبدون «حدد الآرامي،» إله الخصب والرعد والمطر حسب معتقدهم، لذلك أقاموا معبداً مخصصاً له في موقع «المسجد الأموي» المعاصر. ولا يُعرف بالضبط كيف بدأ المعبد، لكن يعتقد أنه اتَّبع النموذج المعماري الكنعاني السامي التقليدي. وهو يشبه معبد القدس، ويتألف من فناء مسور وغرفة صغيرة للعبادة. وقد بقي حجر واحد من المعبد الآرامي يعود لحكم الملك حازائيل، وهو حالياً يُعرض في متحف دمشق الوطني.
واصل معبد حدد الآرامي القيام بدوره المركزي في المدينة حتى غزا الرومان دمشق في عام 64م فأقاموا فيه معبداً للإله جوبيتر، فقاموا بإعادة تكوين وتوسيع المعبد تحت إشراف مهندس معماري وُلد في دمشق يدعى أبولودوروس، وهو من صمم ونفذ التصميم الجديد. وقد أُعجب السكان المحليين بتماثُل وأبعاد «معبد جوبيتر اليوناني الروماني.» وباستثناء زيادة حجم المبنى، حافظ الرومانيون على معظم تصميمه الأصلي، وتُرِك الفناء المسور سليماً إلى حد كبير. وأقيمت في وسط الفناء غرفة داخلية، وكان هناك برج واحد في كل من الزوايا الأربع للفناء. كما استخدمت الأبراج للطقوس تمشياً مع التقاليد الدينية السامية القديمة حيث قُدِّمت الأضاحي في الأماكن المرتفعة.
أصبح المعبد الروماني الجديد السلطة التشريعية الدينية في مدينة دمشق بسبب حجمه الكبير، وكان الغرض من تشييده (وقد أصبح فيما بعد المركز الرئيسي للعبادة في الإمبراطورية الرومانية) أن يكون منافساً للمعبد العبري في القدس. وقد أضيف لـ«معبد جوبيتر» المزيد من الإضافات خلال الفترة الأولى من الحكم الروماني للمدينة، وأصبح أغلب كهنة المعبد أثرياء بسبب التبرعات التي كانوا يجمعونها من المواطنين الأثرياء في دمشق. وقد وُسِّعت البوابة الشرقية لفناء المعبد في عهد سيبتيموس سيفيروس (حكم 193-211 م).
بحلول القرن الرابع للميلاد أصبح المعبد مشهوراً بسبب حجمه وجماله وفُصل عن المدينة بمجموعتين من الجدران. وكان الجدار الأول، الذي يعتبر الأكبر، يمتد على مساحة واسعة شملت السوق. أما الجدار الثاني فيحيط بحرم معبد جوبيتر الأصلي. وكان هذا المعبد الأكبر في سوريا الرومانية. وفي نهاية القرن الرابع للميلاد، تحديداً في عام 391، حُوِّل معبد جوبيتر إلى كاتدرائية القديس يوحنا بأمر من الإمبراطور ثيودوسيوس الأول (حكم بين 379 و395 للميلاد). لكن هذه الكاتدرائية المسيحية لم تكن مكرسة مباشرة ليوحنا المعمدان -النبي يحيى، وكُرِّست لاحقًا من القرن السادس للميلاد، إذ تشير الأسطورة المحلية أن رأس يوحنا المعمدان -النبي يحيى - دُفن هناك. وكانت الكاتدرائية بمثابة مقر أسقف دمشق، الذي يحتل المرتبة الثانية ضمن بطريركية أنطاكية بعد البطريرك نفسه.
ولا تزال أطلال المعبد باقية في منطقة سوق الحريم وحتى منطقة القيمرية.

الفتح الإسلامي وقيام المسجد
في عام 634، تمت محاصرة دمشق من طرف الجيوش الإسلامية بقيادة خالد بن الوليد، ونجح خالد بضمها للأراضي الإسلامية صلحا. بعد عقود من فتح دمشق، أصبحت الخلافة الإسلامية تحت حكم السلالة الأموية، الذين اختاروا دمشق لتكون العاصمة الإدارية للعالم الإسلامي. وقد كلف الخليفة الأموي السادس، الوليد بن عبد الملك (705–715م) الصناع والمهندسين، ببناء المسجد في موقع الكاتدرائية البيزنطية في عام 706 م. قبل هذا، كانت الكاتدرائية لا تزال قيد الاستخدام من طرف المسيحيين المحليين، ولكن قد شُيِّدت غرفة صلاة (المصلي) للمسلمين في الجزء الجنوبي الشرقي من المبنى. الوليد، الذي أشرف شخصياً على المشروع، أمر بهدم معظم الكاتدرائية، بما في ذلك المصلى، وغُيِّر تخطيط المبنى تماما، ليستخدم بصفته مسجداً كبيراً لصلاة الجماعة لمواطني دمشق ومعلماً دينياً لمدينة دمشق.احتج المسيحيون على هذه الخطوة، وردا على هذا الاحتجاج أمر الوليد باسترجاع جميع الكنائس المصادرة الأخرى في المدينة إلى المسيحيين كتعويض. واكتمل بناء المسجد في عام 715 م، بعد وقت قصير من وفاة الوليد، وخلفه سليمان بن عبد الملك (715–717م) في الحكم.
ووفقا لمؤرخ القرن العاشر ابن الفقيه، أُنفق ما بين 600 ألف و 1,000,000 دينار على المشروع، وقد اشتغل به حرفيون أقباط، فضلا عن عمال فارسيين وهنديين ويونانيين الذين يشكلون الجزء الأكبر من القوة العاملة التي تتألف من 12 ألف شخص. ويذكر ابن الفقيه أيضا أن العمال وجدوا مغارة تعود للكنيسة البيزنطية أثناء بناء المسجد، وكانت هذه المغارة تحتوي على صندوق يوجد به رأس القديس يوحنا المعمدان حسب المعتقد المسيحي، أو النبي يحيى بن زكريا في الإسلام. فأمر الوليد بتركه على حاله، وجعل عمودا قائما على المغارة كعلامة مميزة ثم وضع فوقه تابوت عليه اسم النبي يحيى.

في أعقاب الانتفاضة التي أنهت حكم الأمويين عام 750م على يد العباسيين، وأصبحت الخلافة الإسلامية تحت حكم السلالة العباسية الذين قاموا نقل عاصمة الخلافة من دمشق إلى بغداد. وبصرف النظر عن موقع دمشق الإستراتيجي والتجاري، لم يكن للعباسيون مصالح في دمشق. وبالتالي، فإن المسجد الأموي قد عانى في بداية حكمهم، مع القليل من نشاط البناء المسجل بين القرنين 8 و 10 . ومع ذلك، فإن العباسيين نظروا للمسجد ليكون رمزا رئيسيا لانتصار الإسلام، وبالتالي نجا المسجد من منهجية القضاء على تركة الأمويين في مدينة دمشق. . وقام الفضل بن صالح بن علي الحاكم العباسي في دمشق، ببناء قبة في القسم الشرقي من المسجد في 780م. وبعد تسع سنوات، بدأ بتشييد قبة الخزينة بغرض إدخار أموال المسجد  وجاء في مذكرات الجغرافي المقدسي، أن العباسيين قاموا ببناء المئذنة الشمالية («مئذنة العروس») من المسجد في عام 831 في عهد الخليفة المأمون (813-833). وقد أمر المأمون بإزالة واستبدال النقوش الأموية في المسجد.
بحلول القرن 10م، رُكِّبت ساعة ضخمة عند المدخل في الجزء الغربي من الجدار الجنوبي للمسجد (باب زيادة) ويبدو أن هذه الساعة قد توقفت عن عملها بحلول منتصف القرن 12م.

أصبح الحكم العباسي على بلاد الشام متداعيا خلال القرن 10، وفي العقود التي تلت ذلك، أصبحت بلاد الشام خاضعة لحكم الأمراء المحليين، وكانت تابعة للخلافة العباسية اسميا فقط. وفي عام 970م، قام الفاطميون من مصر، بغزوا دمشق، وأجرى الفاطميون بعض التحسينات المسجلة للمسجد. وسمح لسكان دمشق بممارسة مذهبهم السني داخل الجامع الأموي في سكان، وتمكينهم من الحفاظ على الاستقلال النسبي من السلطة الدينية الفاطمية الشيعية. وفي 1069، دُمِّرت أجزاء كبيرة من المسجد، خاصة الجدار الشمالي، في حريق نتيجة لانتفاضة سكان مدينة دمشق ضد الجيش الفاطمي بسبب الاعتداءات من طرف الثكنات الفاطمية في حق سكان دمشق.

عصر السلاجقة والأيوبيين
في سنة 1078م، استعاد سلاجقة الأتراك مدينة دمشق من أيدي الفاطميين، وأصبحت دمشق تابعة للخلافة العباسية اسميا فقط. وشرع الملك السلجوقي تتش بن ألب أرسلان (حكم 1079-1095) لإصلاح الأضرار الناجمة عن الحريق الذي أصاب المسجد سنة 1069، وفي عام 1082م، قام أبو نصر أحمد بن الفضل وزير تتش السلجوقي، بإعادة تشييد القبة المركزية في شكل أكثر إثارة؛ وقام أيضا بترميم اثنين من الأرصفة دعم وتجديد الفسيفساء الأموية الأصلية من الواجهة الداخلية الشمالية للمسجد. وأعيد بناء الرواق الشمالي في عام 1089م. وفي عام 1110م، قام ظاهر الدين طغتكين (حكم 1104-1128) وهو أحد أتابكة السلاجقة في دمشق، بإصلاح الجدار الشمالي وخُصص نقشان له أدرجا فوق مدخل. وفي عام 1113، اُغتيل شرف الدين مودود (حكم 1109-1113) أحد أتابكة السلاجقة في الموصل في الجامع الأموي. وبما أن الصراع بين دمشق والصليبيين زاد في منتصف القرن 12م، كان المسجد الأموي بمثابة نقطة التجمع الرئيسية لدعوة المسلمين للدفاع عن المدينة واستعادة القدس إلى أيدي المسلمين. ويُعتبر ابن عساكر أحد الأئمة البارزين الذي بشروا بالجهاد، وعندما تقدم الصليبيون نحو دمشق سنة 1148، استجاب سكان المدينة لدعوات المطالبة بالجهاد؛ وعلى إثر هذا انسحب الجيش الصليبي نتيجة المقاومة البطولية لسكان دمشق.

وفي عام 1154 م، خلال عهد نور الدين زنكي، بنيت ساعة أثرية ثانية، وساعة جيرون المائية، بأوامر شخصية من نور الدين. وشيدت الساعة من خارج المدخل الشرقي للمسجد (باب جيرون) من قبل وأعاد بناؤها المعماري محمد الساعاتي، بعد حريق أصاب المسجد في عام 1167، كما رُمِّمت في نهاية المطاف على يد ابنه، رضوان، في أوائل القرن 13. وقد نجت من حريق في القرن 14. وقد زار الجغرافي العربي الإدريسي المسجد الأموي عام 1154.
وفي العهد الأيوبي شهدت دمشق إنشاء العديد من المؤسسات الدينية، وأُبقي على الجامع الأموي في مكانه كمركز للحياة الدينية في المدينة. ووصف الرحالة الأندلسي ابن جبير أهمية المسجد كمركز شامل للعلوم الدينية، نظرا لاحتوائه العديد من الزوايا المختلفة للدراسات الدينية والقرآنية. وفي عام 1173، تعرض الجدار الشمالي للمسجد مرة أخرى لأضرار بسبب اندلاع حريق، وأعيد بناؤه من قبل السلطان الأيوبي صلاح الدين (حكم 1174-1193)، جنبا إلى جنب مع مئذنة العروس، التي كانت قد دمرت في الحريق الذي وقع سنة 1069م، وخلال النزاعات الداخلية بين الأمراء الأيوبيين لاحقًا، تعرضت مدينة دمشق بسب هذه النزاعات لأضرار كبيرة، وفي عام 1245م، دُمِّرت المئذنة الشرقية للمسجد المعروفة بمئذنة عيسى على يد الصالح أيوب سابع خلافاء بني أيوب بمصر، في أثناء محاصرته لدمشق في عهد الصالح إسماعيل الأمير الأيوبي لدمشق. وقد أعيد بناء المئذنة لاحقًا مع إضافة زخرفة قليلة لها.
دُفن صلاح الدين الأيوبي مع العديد من خلفائه، حول المسجد الأموي.

دولة المماليك
وفي عام 1260م. تحالف المغول، بقيادة كتبغا مع القوات الصليبية، واستولوا على دمشق من الأيوبيين، وقد أمر بوهيموند السادس أمير إمارة أنطاكية، بإقامة القداس الكاثوليكي في «المسجد الأموي». ومع ذلك، استطاع المماليك بقيادة قطز وبيبرس، استرجاع مدينة دمشق لاحقًا في نفس العام. وفي عام 1270، أمر بيبرس بترميمات واسعة النطاق للمسجد، لا سيما الرخام والفسيفساء والايرمينيه. ووفقا لكاتب سيرة بيبرس، ابن شداد، أن تكلفة ترميمات التي أقيمت في عهد بيبرس بلغت 20,000 ديناراً. وكان من بين أكبر الشظايا التي أضيفت للمسجد هي قطعة فسيفساء يبلغ طولها 34.5 متر وعرضها 7.3 متر، وقد أقيمت هذه الفسيفساء في الرواق الغربي وتسمى لوحة بردى. وكانت هذه القطعة من الفسيفساء التي زينت المسجد جزء من مشروع الترميم الذي شمل المسجد، وكان لها تأثير كبير في عمارة المماليك في مصر والشام.
في عام 1285م، بدأ العالم ابن تيمية بتدريس تفسير القرآن في المسجد. وفي عام 1300م، قام إلخانية المغول بقيادة محمود غازان بغزو مدينة دمشق، فقام ابن تيمية بحثّ مواطني دمشق على الجهاد ومقاومة الاحتلال. واستطاع المماليك بقيادة قلاوون بطرد المغول لاحقًا من تلك السنة. وعندما دخلت قوات قلاوون إلى المدينة، حاول المغول إقامة عدة مجانيق في «المسجد الأموي» لكن محاولتهم باءت بالفشل. وشرع المماليك بحرق المجانيق قبل أن توضع في المسجد.
وفي الأعوام الممتدة مابين 1326-1328م، قام الوالي المملوكي في الشام، تانكيز، بأعمال ترميم في المسجد، وأمر بإعادة تجميع لوحات الفسيفساء على جدار القبلة واستبدال كل البلاط في قاعة الصلاة بالرخام. كما قام السلطان المملوكي الناصر محمد بن قلاوون بأعمال ترميم رئيسية للمسجد في عام 1328. وقد هدمت قبلة الجدار غير المستقرة وأُعيد بناؤها ونُقلت بوابة باب زيادة إلى الجهة الشرقية من المسجد. وقد تضرر جزء كبير من هذه الأعمال خلال الحريق الذي أحرق المسجد في عام 1339. وقد وصف خبير الفن الإسلامي، فينبار ب.فلوود. دور المماليك البحرية في إعادة ترميم المسجد الأموي بالهوس، وجهودهم في صيانة وإصلاح واستعادة المسجد كانت لا مثيل لها في أي فترة أخرى من حكم الإسلامي لدمشق. وقد قضى عالم الفلك العربي ابن الشاطر معظم حياته في وظيفة التوقيت ورئاسة المؤذنين في الجامع الأموي من عام 1332 حتى وفاته في عام 1376. وقد قيل أنه قام بتنصيب مزولة كبيرة على المئذنة الشمالية للمسجد في عام 1371. وفي عام 1392م احترقت مئذنة عيسى خلال حريق أصاب المسجد عام 1392م .
وفي عام 1400، غزا تيمور دمشق. وأصدر أوامره بإحراق المدينة يوم 17 آذار/مارس، وقد دمر الحريق أجزاء كبيرة من المسجد الأموي. وانهارت المئذنة الشرقية والقبة المركزية. ورُمِّمت لاحقًا، وأضيفت مئذنة في جهة الجنوب الغربي من المسجد خلال عهد السلطان المملوكي قايتباي في عام 1488م.

الدولة العثمانية
في عام 1516م، سيطر العثمانيون على دمشق بقيادة سليم الأول بعد انتصارهم على المماليك في معركة مرج دابق. وحضر سليم الأول لتأدية صلاة الجمعة في الجامع الأموي . واستخدم العثمانيون نظام الوقف للمواقع الدينية كوسيلة لربط السكان المحليين مع السلطة المركزية. وكان وقف الجامع الأموي هو الأكبر في المدينة، ووظِّف 596 شخص. وخُصصت أغلب الوظائف الإشرافية والكتابية للمسؤولين العثمانيين في حين خُصصت المكاتب الدينية في الغالب للعلماء المحليين. على الرغم من أن الأوقاف تخضع للضريبة، فقدأُعفي الجامع الأموي منها. وفي عام 1518، قام جانبيردي الغزالي الوالي العثماني لدمشق والمشرف العام لوقف المسجد، بعمليات إصلاح وتزيين المسجد كجزء من برنامجه بإعادة إعمار مدينة دمشق.
وفي عام 1661م عُيِّن الباحث الصوفي البارز عبد الغني النابلسي للتدريس في المسجد الأموي.

وفي عام 1893م شب حريق أدى إلى تدمير معظم الفسيفساء والألواح الرخامية، ولكن أُعيدا في وقت لاحق. وقد دمر الحريق أيضا النسيج الداخلي لقاعة الصلاة وتسبب في انهيار القبة الوسطى للمسجد. والسبب الرئيسي لهذا الحريق هو أحد العمال الذين كانوا يقومون بأعمال ترميم للمسجد، وقد كان هذا العامل يقوم بطريق الخطأ بتدخين النارجيلة. وقد قام العثمانيون بإعادة تشييد كامل المسجد، ولكن اُحتفظ بالهيكل الأصيل احتفاظاً كبيراً.
وفي عام 1899م، أعطيت معظم محتويات قبة الخزنة إلى الإمبراطور الألماني فيلهلم الثاني واُحتفظ بعدد قليل من القطع في الأرشيف الوطني في دمشق"

سوريا الحديثة
الانتداب الفرنسي
في عام 1929، كان أهالي دمشق يجتمعون في الجامع الأموي كل جمعة، ليقوموا بمظاهرات منددة ضد سلطات الانتداب الفرنسي، ولم يقتحم الفرنسيون الجامع طيلة وجودهم في سوريا لمعرفتهم بمكانة الجامع الأموي عند أهل الشام.
وقد خضع المسجد الأموي لترميمات كبرى خلال الانتداب الفرنسي على سوريا، واستمرت حتى عام 1963 في ظل الجمهورية السورية الأولى.

ما بعد الاستعمار
في الثمانينات وفي أوائل التسعينات، أمر الرئيس السوري حافظ الأسد بعملية تجديد واسعة النطاق للمسجد. وشملت الترميمات المئذنة الغربية للمسجد (مئذنة قيتابي) والواجة الغربية للجامع، والجدار الشمالي للجامع المطل على ضريح صلاح الدين، كما أعيد تبليط المدخل الغربي للجامع، وتجديد الأرضيات وتبديل القواعد الحجرية التالفة للأعمدة، ومعالجة الخشبيات التالفة وترميم وإصلاح الصالات وإعادة إنشاء وتركيب قبة داخل صحن الجامع، إضافةً لإنشاء شبكة إطفاء خاصة بالمسجد.
وقد انتهت أعمال الترميم والإصلاح في سنة 1414هـ / 1994م، وأعيد افتتاح المسجد.
وفي عام 2001، زار البابا يوحنا بولس الثاني المسجد، لرؤية أثار مقام يوحنا المعمدان. وكانت هذه هي المرة الأولى التي يقوم فيها البابا بزيارة إلى مسجد.
وفي 15 مارس 2011، بدأت أول الاحتجاجات التي تتعلق بالحرب الأهلية السورية في المسجد الأموي عندما اجتمع مابين 40-50 مصلٍّ، حيث قام المتظاهرون برفع شعارات تطالب بالديمقراطية. لكن قوات الأمن السورية قامت بقمع الاحتجاجات بسرعة، وطُوِّق المسجد خلال صلاة الجمعة لمنع ظهور مظاهرات الواسعة النطاق.

العمارة
الفناء وحرم الجامع
أرضية المسجد الأموي هي مستطيلة الشكل وهي بقياس 97 متر عرض و 156 متر طول. ويحتل الفناء الجزء الأكبر من المسجد وهو يغطي الجزء الخارجي الشمالي من المسجد، في حين يغطي حرم الجامع الجزء الجنوبي من المسجد. ويحيط فناء المسجد أربعة جدران خارجية. أما الأرصفة الحجرية للفناء فقد أصبحت متفاوتة بمرور الزمن بسبب الإصلاحات التي مر بها المسجد على مدار التاريخ، وقد سُويَّت مؤخرًا. أما الأروقة المحيطة بالفناء فقد دُعِمت بأعمدة حجرية وأرصفة بشكل متناوب. ويوجد رصيف واحد بين كل عمودين. نظراً لأن الجزء الشمالي من الفناء قد دمر في زلزال وقع في عام 1759، كما أن الممرات ليست متسقة؛ ويرجع ذلك لعدم وجود الأعمدة التي كانت تدعم ذلك، عندما أعيد بناء الجدار الشمالي. كما يوجد أيضاً داخل صحن الجامع عمودان ذوو رأس نحاسي مزخرف كانا يستعملان للإضاءة.
وتتكون المساحة الداخلية من الحرم من ثلاثة أروقة. وهي موازية لاتجاه الصلاة نحو مكة المكرمة. ودُعِمت الأروقة بصفين من الأعمدة الكورنثية. وكل واحد من هذه الأروقة ينقسم إلى مستويين. ويتألف المستوى الأول من أقواس نصف دائرية كبيرة، في حين أن المستوى الثاني يتكون من أقواس مزدوجة. ويتكرر هذا النمط في أروقة الفناء. أما الأروقة الداخلية الثلاثة تتقاطع في وسط الحرم مع رواق كبير، يوازي جدار القبلة («اتجاه الصلاة») ويواجه المحراب والمنبر. وينقسم الجناح المركزي في الأروقة إلى نصفين ويتكون من أحد عشر قوسًا. والحرم الشريف هو بقياس 136 متر طول و37 متر عرض.
كما يوجد داخل فناء الجامع ثلاث منشئات صغيرة وهي:

قبة الخزنة

أنشئت قبة الخزنة بداية في العهد العباسي في عام 789م، واستخدمت كخزنة لأموال الجامع، ومن ثم أصبحت مكتبة لكتب ومخطوطات الجامع النفيسة.

قبة الوضوء
أنشئت قبة الوضوء بداية في العهد العباسي، وانهارت بعد وقوع زلزال في عام 1759م، وقد جددت في العهد العثماني بأمر من والي دمشق عثمان باشا الكرجي، وتقع في وسط الفناء وهي مجوفة مثمنة من رخام قائمة على أربعة أعمدة رخامية في وسطها أنبوب ماء من النحاس يمج الماء إلى الأعلى.

قبة الساعات
تقع في الجهة الشرقية من فناء الجامع الأموي، ويعود تاريخها إلى العهد العثماني، أما عن تسميتها بقبة الساعات، فيعود إلى العصر العثماني الذي نقل إليها الساعات الموجودة على باب الجامع، وجعل منها مركز التوقيت.

المحاريب
يوجد أربعة محاريب على خط جدار الحرم، وأهمها محراب الصحابة الكبير الذي يقع تقريبًا في وسط الجدار. ويقع محراب صحابة النبي في النصف الشرقي. ووفقا للمهندس العباسي موسى بن شاكر، بُني المحراب الأخير خلال مرحلة التشييد الأولى للمسجد، وأصبح المحراب ثالث محراب متخصص في تاريخ الإسلام. وهو أقدم محراب في المسجد، حيث كان يصلي المسلمين قبل إنشاء المسجد، ويسمى أيضاً محراب المالكية. أما المحاريب الباقية فهي:

محراب الخطيب
محراب الحنفية
محراب الحنابلة

واجهة الحرم
زُيين الفناء والحرم الشريف للجامع الأموي بواجهة فخمة تزيد المسجد فخامة ووقاراً معروفة بواجهة الحرم، وتقع في الجهة الجنوبية من المسجد، وتطل على الفناء والذي يضم 25 باباً خشبياً تنفتح مباشرة على الحرم.
ويعتقد المؤرخون أن واجهة الحرم كانت مماثلة للأسلوب والنمط المعماري لبقية الأروقة من حيث تناوب العضائد والأعمدة، وأعيد بناء الواجهة من غير أعمدة بعد حريق وقع عام 1067، وحلَّ محل هذه الأعمدة عضائد يرتفع في منتصفها كتلة فخمة مازالت على وضعها الأموي الأصلي، وتتألف هذه الكتلة من ثلاثة أبواب بقناطر نصف دائرية ترتكز على عضادتين يتوسطهما عمودان، وفوق هذه الأبواب الثلاثة قوس كبير يحتوي ثلاثة نوافذ.
وقد وُضِع على جانبي هذه الكتلة برجان صغيران تعلوهما قبتان صغيرتان من الرصاص فوقهما ثلاث تفاحات وهلال من النحاس.
وفي عهد الوليد كانت هذه الواجهة بما فيها مكسوّة بـالفسيفساء، سقط معظمها إثر الحرائق والزلازل التي أصابت المسجد على مدار التاريخ، وبقيت على حالها حتى الستينات من القرن الماضي حيث تمت عملية ترميم واستصناع الفسيفساء بإشراف وزارة الأوقاف والمديرية العامة للمتاحف، وكُسيت هذه الواجهة برسوم فسيفسائية مستوحاة من الأسلوب الأموي الأصيل.

قبة النسر
هي إحدى إنجازات الوليد بن عبد الملك وأكبر قبة في المسجد الأموي، وقد جددت هذه القبة في عهد نظام الملك وزير ملك شاه السلجوقي في عام 1075، وقام صلاح الدين الأيوبي بتجديد ركنين منها في عام 1179، واستبدلت القبة الخشبية الأصلية وبنائها من الحجر في أعقاب الحريق الذي وقع عام 1893.
وتقع القبة فوق مركز قاعة الصلاة، بارتفاع 45 متر وقطرها 16 مترًا، وترتكز القبة على طبقة تحتية مثمنة مع اثنين من النوافذ المقوسة على جانبيها، ودُعِمت بأعمدة الممرات الداخلية المركزية.
ووصفها ابن جبير قائلا فيها:

أما عن تسميتها بقبة النسر فيقول ابن جبير في كتابه أحسن التقاسيم في معرفة الأقاليم:

المآذن والمشاهد
المآذن
يحتوي المسجد الأموي على ثلاث مآذن وهي مئذنة العروس و مئذنة النبي عيسى ومئذنة قايتباي.

مئذنة العروس
تعتبر مئذنة العروس أقدم مئذنة شيدت في المسجد، وتقع في الجدار الشمالي للمسجد. لكن تاريخ تشييدها الدقيق غير معروف. أما الجزء السفلي من المئذنة يعود إلى الحقبة العباسية في القرن التاسع حسب المراجع التي وصلتنا. وقد يكون العباسيون قد بنوها فوق المئذنة الأموية القديمة، ولكن لا يوجد دليل قطعي يؤكد أن مئذنة الجدار الشمالي (مئذنة العروس) كانت جزءًا من المسجد الأصلي الذي بناه الخليفة الوليد. وقد ذكر شمس الدين المقدسي في مذكراته أن المئذنة قد شيدت في أواخر القرن العاشر الميلادي، أثناء زيارته لموقع المئذنة خلال الحكم العباسي لدمشق في عام 985م حيث وصفها أنها شيدت مؤخرًا، أما الجزء العلوي من المئذنة شُيِّدَ في عام 1174. ويستخدم هذه المئذنة المؤذن للدعوة للصلاة، ويوجد درج لولبي يتكون من 160 درجة يؤدي بدوره إلى غرفة المؤذن.

وتنقسم مئذنة العروس إلى قسمين؛ البرج الرئيسي متصل بمئذنة صغيرة ثانية من خلال ممر مسقوف ينتهي بشرفة خشبية مضلعة يعلوها قبة صنوبرية بتفاحات وهلال دائري. تعود إلى العصر المملوكي. ويعتبر البرج الرئيسي أقدم جزء من المئذنة، وهو مربع الشكل، له أربعة معارض، ويتألف من شكلين مختلفين من البناء؛ حيث تتكون القاعدة من كتل كبيرة، في حين بُني الجزء العلوي من الحجر. كما يوجد اثنين من فتحات الضوء بالقرب من أعلى البرج الرئيسي قبل السطح، مع أقواس على شكل حدوة الحصان مقوسنة تحت قوس واحد. وفي القرن 18 عُلِّقت مزولة أصلية تعود للقرن 14 التي بناها ابن الشاطر.

مئذنة عيسى
تقع مئذنة عيسى في الزاوية الجنوبية الشرقية للمسجد الأموي، ويبلغ ارتفاعها حوالي 77 متر، كما تعتبر أطول المآذن الثلاث. وتذكر بعض المصادر أن المئذنة بنيت من طرف العباسيين في القرن التاسع، بينما تعزو مصادر أخرى أن الهيكل الأصلي يعود للعهد الأموي، وقد ظلت مئدنة عيسى إحدى أطول 5 بنايات بشرية لأكثر من 400 عام، ما بين القرن 8 والقرن 12 م. وتنقسم المئذنة إلى قسمين متنافرين، حيث أن القسم السفلي بُنِى في العهد الأيوبي في عام 1247، بينما شيد القسم العلوي في العهد العثماني. الجزء السفلي للمئذنة هو على مربع الشكل وتحتوي على نوافذ عثمانية مقوسنة، شبيهة بنوافذ مئذنة العروس، أما الجزء العلوي فيأتي مباشرة وبانتقال غير متناسب هندسياً إلى جذع مثمن الأضلاع عثماني الطراز، يتضمن شرفتين للمؤذن بمقرنصات خفيفة بدون مظلات ساترة، ويعلو المئذنة قلنسوة مخروطية الشكل يعلوها ثلاث تفاحات وهلال كامل الاستدارة.
أما عن سبب تسميتها بمئذنة عيسى، فهي بسبب الاعتقاد الشعبي السائد بأن النبي عيسى سينزل في آخر الزمان في هذا الموقع لمحاربة الدجال. ويدعم ابن كثير هذه الفكرة، وهو أحد العلماء المسلمين البارزين في القرن الرابع عشر.

مئذنة قايتباي
بنيت مئذنة قايتباي المعروفة أيضا بالمئذنة الغربية، في عهد السلطان المملوكي قايتباي في عام 1488. وهي أحد أهم المعالم الإسلامية المصرية النموذجية في دمشق، في الفترة المملوكية، وتعتبر أول مئذنة شيدت في دمشق على هذا الطراز، والمئذنة هي مثمنة الشكل وتنقسم إلى ثلاثة أجزاء. ويوجد اعتقاد أن مئذنة عيسى ومئذنة قايتباي بنيا فوق أبراج رومانية قديمة، لكن بعض العلماء شككوا في صحة هذا الاعتقاد. في أكتوبر 2025، بعد مرور ما يقارب العام على سقوط نظام الأسد، أُزيل اسم حافظ الأسد الذي كان منقوشاً على مئذنة قايتباي عقب أعمال ترميم سابقة.

المشاهد
المشاهد هي عبارة عن صالات واسعة ضمن المسجد الأموي، وقد اختلفت وظيفتها باختلاف الزمن، ويحتوي الجامع الأموي بدمشق على أربعة مشاهد تقع على يمين ويسار البابين الشرقي والغربي، وسُميت بدايةً بأسماء الخلفاء الراشدين الأربعة وهي تتوزع كالتالي:

مشهد أبي بكر
يقع مشهد أبي بكر الصديق في الجهة الجنوبية الشرقية من المسجد الأموي ويستعمل الآن كمتحف للجامع.

مشهد عمر
يقع مشهد عمر بن الخطاب في الجهة الجنوبية الغربية من المسجد الأموي ويستعمل الآن كمقر لإدارة المسجد.

مشهد عثمان
يقع مشهد الخليفة عثمان بن عفان في الجهة الشمالية الغربية من المسجد ويستعمل الآن كقاعة شرف لاستقبال كبار الضيوف.

مشهد علي والحسين
يقع مشهد الخليفة علي بن أبي طالب في الزاوية الشمالية الشرقية من المسجد الأموي، ويحتوي على مزار ومقام رأس الإمام الحسين بن علي، وقد غلبت عليه تسمية مشهد الحسين.

بئر الجامع
يقع بئر الجامع في الحرم الشريف، ويقابل محراب الصحابة، ويعتبر البئر من أقدم منشآت الجامع، وقد أنشأ في حرم الجامع قبل توسعة الوليد، وقد شُيِّد بهدف تزويد المصلين بماء الوضوء والشرب. وقد حافظ الوليد على هذا البئر وأضاف إليه عمودين نفيسين مع توابعهما قدر ثمنهم بألف وخمس مئة دينار ذهبي، دفعها الوليد لخالد بن يزيد أثناء التجهيزات التي أجريت على البئر .

أبواب الجامع
يحتوي المسجد الأموي على أربعة أبواب رئيسية وهي:

باب جيرون
هو أحد أبواب الجامع الأموي الأربعة، ويقع على الحائط الشرقي للجامع ويقابل حي النوفرة، وهو مؤلف من ثلاث فتحات، حيث يوجد في الوسط باب كبير وإلى جانبيه بابان صغيران، أما عن تسميته بـ باب جيرون فتوجد عدة نظريات تشرح ذلك، فالمؤرخون العرب ينسبوه إلى جيرون بن سعد بن عاد، ويعتقد أنه هو الذي بنى مدينة جيرون التي سميت لاحقا بدمشق، ويوجد تحليل آخر للاسم وهو لغوي مشتق من الجذر جار، وهو للدلالة على الأحياء المجاورة، ويطلق على هذا الباب الآن أسم باب النوفرة نسبةً لـ حي النوفرة المقابل له.

باب العمارة/باب الكلاسة
هو أحد أبواب الجامع الأموي الأربعة، ويقع على الحائط الشمالي للجامع تحت مئذنة العروس من ناحية العمارة، وهو مؤلف من بوابة واحدة تطل على صحن فناء الجامع الأموي، وقد سُمي بعدة أسماء نذكر منها باب الفراديس، وباب الناطفانيين لكونه كان يطل على الحي المشهور بصناعة الناطف، ويسمى أيضا باب الكلاسة نسبة إلى حي الكلاسة المقابل له، ويعرف أيضاً بباب العمارة نسبةً لحي العمارة القريب منه.

باب بريد
هو أحد أبواب الجامع الأموي الأربعة، ويقع على الحائط الغربي للجامع مقابل ساحة المسكية، وهو مؤلف من ثلاث فتحات، حيث يوجد في الوسط باب كبير وإلى جانبيه بابان صغيران، كما أن باب بريد يقابل باب جيرون، ويشرح المؤرخون العرب هذه التسمية بأن بريد هو شقيق جيرون، وهو ابن عاد بن عوص بن إرم بن سام بن نوح وقد سميت البوابتان الرئيستان باسمهما، ويطلق على هذا الباب أيضا اسم باب المسكية نسبةً لسوق المسكية المقابل له.

باب الزيادة
هو أحد أبواب الجامع الأموي الأربعة، ويقع في الجهة الغربية من الحائط الجنوبي مقابل سوق الصاغة، وهو الباب الوحيد المؤدي مباشرة لحرم المسجد، وقد سُمي بهذا الاسم لكونه أُحدث زيادةً في سور المعبد عند بناء الجامع في عهد الوليد، ويعرف أيضاً باسم باب الساعات في نهاية الألفية الأولى حيث وصفه ابن عساكر بقوله:

وقد زود الجامع الأموي في كل العهود بساعة شمسية، وساعة فلكية، وساعات أخرى، اختلفت أشكالها وأحجامها باختلاف العصور، وقد اشتهرت منها ساعة وصفها بدقة الرحالة ابن جبير قائلاً:

وفي عام 1200، انتقلت هذه الساعات إلى باب جيرون، وانتقلت هذه التسمية أيضاً إلى باب جيرون.
ويعرف باب الزيادة الآن باسم باب الصاغة نسبةً لسوق الصاغة المقابل له. ويسمى أيضا بـ باب القوافين نسبة إلى سوق القوافين القديم وحي القوافين الذي كان موجوداً هناك آنذاك.

التأثيرات الهندسية على المسجد
المسجد الأموي هو أحد المساجد القليلة في العالم الإسلامي التي حافظت على نفس الهيكل العام والمعالم المعمارية، منذ بنائه الأول في أوائل القرن الثامن، وطابعه الأموي لم يتغير إلى حد كبير. ومنذ إنشائه استعمل المسجد لتأدية صلاة الجماعة في سوريا، ووفقًا للمؤرخ فينبار باري فلوود، فإن «بناء مسجد دمشق لم يغير المشهد الحضري لمدينة دمشق فقط، بل أكد أثر هيمنة العمارة الأموية في العالم الإسلامي، وأضاف المسجد الأموي في دمشق بعدا أخر في عمارة المساجد في سوريا والعالم الإسلامي بشكل عام». ومن أمثلة المساجد التي تأثرت بالمسجد الأموي كنموذج أولي هي:

الجامع الأزهر
مسجد بيبرس في القاهرة
المسجد الكبير في قرطبة في إسبانيا
المسجد الكبير في مدينة بورصة
جامع السليمية في تركيا.

خطباء الجامع الأموي
اعتلى سدة منبر الجامع وإمامة المصلين فيه، عدد من أشهر علماء بلاد الشام عبر التاريخ، منهم:

علماء عائلة الخطيب الحسني
الشيخ عبد القادر الخطيب
أحمد معاذ الخطيب
محمد سعيد رمضان البوطي وابنه من بعده

معرض الصور
المراجع
هوامش
وصلات خارجية

جولة افتراضية ثلاثية الأبعاد في المسجد الأموي
الجامع الأموي - وزارة السياحة السورية
صور للجامع الأموي - الشمعة.
علي الطنطاوي، كتاب الجامع الأموي في دمشق



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ALEPPO
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:28:21


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 13,154
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleppo
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Aleppo is the largest city in Syria and serves as the capital of the Aleppo Governorate, the most populous governorate of Syria. With an estimated population of 2,098,000 residents as of 2021, it is Syria's largest city by urban area, and was the primary economic centre until it was surpassed by Damascus, the capital of Syria. Aleppo is also the largest city in Syria's northern governorates and one of the largest cities in the Levant region.
Aleppo is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world; it may have been inhabited since the sixth millennium BC. Excavations at Tell as-Sawda and Tell al-Ansari, just south of the old city of Aleppo, show that the area was occupied by Amorites by the latter part of the third millennium BC. That is also the time at which Aleppo is first mentioned in cuneiform tablets unearthed in Ebla and Mesopotamia, which speak of it as part of the Amorite state of Yamhad, and note its commercial and military importance. Such a long history is attributed to its strategic location as a trading center between the Mediterranean Sea and Mesopotamia. For centuries, Aleppo was the largest city in the Syrian region, and the Ottoman Empire's third-largest after Constantinople (now Istanbul) and Cairo. The city's significance in history has been its location at one end of the Silk Road, which passed through Central Asia and Mesopotamia. When the Suez Canal was inaugurated in 1869, much trade was diverted to sea and Aleppo began its slow decline.
At the fall of the Ottoman Empire after World War I, Aleppo lost its northern hinterland to modern Turkey, as well as the important Baghdad Railway connecting it to Mosul. In 1939, it lost its main access to the sea, by Antakya and İskenderun, also to Turkey. The growth in importance of Damascus in the past few decades further exacerbated the situation. This decline may have helped to preserve the old city of Aleppo, its medieval architecture and traditional heritage. It won the title of the Islamic Capital of Culture 2006 and has had a wave of successful restorations of its historic landmarks. The battle of Aleppo occurred in the city during the Syrian civil war, and many parts of the city suffered massive destruction. Affected parts of the city are currently undergoing reconstruction. An estimated 31,000 people were killed in Aleppo during the conflict.

Etymology
Proto-Semitic Origins
The etymology of the name Aleppo (Arabic: Ḥalab, حلب) is ancient and rooted in the long history of the region.
The name Ḥalab is believed to originate from a Semitic root, possibly the Proto-Semitic root ḥlb, meaning “to milk” or “milk.” This connection might have arisen due to the area's association with pastoralism and the production of milk. Another possibility is that the name refers to the color “white,” as the root ḥlb could metaphorically describe the pale or white hue of certain local soils or materials. Similarly, the modern-day nickname al-Shahbāʾ (Arabic: الشهباء), meaning "the white-colored mixed with black", is said to be derived from its famed white marble.

Amorite Origins and Hittite Influence
During the second millennium BCE, it became a key city of the Amorite state, who referred to it as Ḥalab. The Hittites, a contemporary Anatolian Empire within the region, referred to the city as Ḥalpa or Ḥalpu in their inscriptions. This indicates the name was already well-established by this time.

Aramaic and Akkadian Adaptations
In Aramaic, the city retained a similar name, with forms like Ḥalba. Akkadian sources also refer to the city as Ḥalab.

Greek and Roman Periods
During the Hellenistic and Roman periods, Aleppo was known as Beroea (Βέροια in Greek), a name likely assigned by the Seleucid rulers after the Macedonian city of the same name. Despite this, the local population continued to use the original Semitic name.

Islamic Period
With the advent of Islam and the Arabization of the region, the name Ḥalab (Arabic: حلب) remained in use, reflecting its deep historical continuity. The Arabic form also preserved its earlier meanings, with folklore often associating the name with the prophet Abraham, who is said to have “milked” his livestock in the area to provide for travelers.

Modern-day English
The adoption of “Aleppo” into English likely coincided with the Crusades (11th–13th centuries) and subsequent increased trade and travel between Europe and the Middle East. By the late 14th to early 15th centuries, the term Aleppo was well-established in English literature and travel accounts.
The earliest documented use of “Aleppo” in English occurs in translations of medieval texts and chronicles, such as the travel writings of Marco Polo, where the city is mentioned as a key trading hub. Additionally, it was featured in maps and documents produced during the European Renaissance as a center of commerce on the Silk Road.

History
Pre-history and pre-classical era
Aleppo has scarcely been touched by archaeologists, since the modern city occupies its ancient site. The earliest occupation of the site was around 8,000 BC, as shown by excavations in Tallet Alsauda.
Aleppo appears in historical records as an important city much earlier than Damascus. The first record of Aleppo comes from the third millennium BC, in the Ebla tablets when Aleppo was referred to as Ha-lam (𒄩𒇴). This has been identified as an early form of Ḥalab due to an interchange of /m/ and /b/ that has been attested in Sumerian texts, including with the cuneiform sign Lam. Some historians, such as Wayne Horowitz, identify Aleppo with the capital of an independent kingdom closely related to Ebla, known as Armi, although this identification is contested. The main temple of the storm god Hadad was located on the citadel hill in the center of the city, when the city was known as the city of Hadad.

Naram-Sin of Akkad mentioned his destruction of Ebla and Armanum, in the 23rd century BC. However, the identification of Armani in the inscription of Naram-Sim as Armi in the Eblaite tablets is heavily debated, as there was no Akkadian annexation of Ebla or northern Syria.
In the Old Babylonian and Old Assyrian Empire period, Aleppo's name appears in its original form as Ḥalab (Ḥalba) for the first time. Aleppo was the capital of the important Amorite dynasty of Yamḥad. The kingdom of Yamḥad (c. 1800–1525 BC), alternatively known as the 'land of Ḥalab,' was one of the most powerful in the Near East during the reign of Yarim-Lim I, who formed an alliance with Hammurabi of Babylonia against Shamshi-Adad I of Assyria.

Hittite period
Yamḥad was devastated by the Hittites under Mursili I in the 16th century BC. However, it soon resumed its leading role in the Levant when the Hittite power in the region waned due to internal strife.
Taking advantage of the power vacuum in the region, Baratarna, king of the Hurrian kingdom of Mitanni instigated a rebellion that ended the life of Yamhad's last king Ilim-Ilimma I in c. 1525 BC, Subsequently, Parshatatar conquered Aleppo and the city found itself on the frontline in the struggle between the Mitanni, the Hittites and Egypt. Niqmepa of Alalakh who descends from the old Yamhadite kings controlled the city as a vassal to Mitanni and was attacked by Tudhaliya I of the Hittites as a retaliation for his alliance to Mitanni. Later the Hittite king Suppiluliumas I permanently defeated Mitanni, and conquered Aleppo in the 14th century BC. Suppiluliumas installed his son Telepinus as king and a dynasty of Suppiluliumas descendants ruled Aleppo until the Late Bronze Age collapse. However, Talmi-Šarruma, grandson of Suppiluliumas I, who was the king of Aleppo, had fought on the Hittite side, along with king Muwatalli II during the Battle of Kadesh against the Egyptian army led by Ramesses II.

Aleppo had cultic importance to the Hittites as the center of worship of the Storm-God. This religious importance continued after the collapse of the Hittite empire at the hands of the Assyrians and Phrygians in the 12th century BC, when Aleppo became part of the Middle Assyrian Empire, whose king renovated the temple of Hadad which was discovered in 2003.
In 2003, a statue of a king named Taita bearing inscriptions in Luwian was discovered during excavations conducted by German archeologist Kay Kohlmeyer in the Citadel of Aleppo. The new readings of Anatolian hieroglyphic signs proposed by the Hittitologists Elisabeth Rieken and Ilya Yakubovich were conducive to the conclusion that the country ruled by Taita was called Palistin. This country extended in the 11th-10th centuries BC from the Amouq Valley in the west to Aleppo in the east down to Maharda and Shaizar in the south. Due to the similarity between Palistin and Philistines, Hittitologist John David Hawkins (who translated the Aleppo inscriptions) hypothesizes a connection between the Syro-Hittite states Palistin and the Philistines, as do archaeologists Benjamin Sass and Kay Kohlmeyer. Gershon Galil suggests that King David halted the Arameans' expansion into the Land of Israel on account of his alliance with the southern Philistine kings, as well as with Toi, king of Ḥamath, who is identified with Tai(ta) II, king of Palistin (the northern Sea Peoples).

State of Bit Agusi
During the early years of the 1st millennium BC, Aleppo was incorporated into the Aramean realm of Bit Agusi, which held its capital at Arpad. Bit Agusi along with Aleppo and the entirety of the Levant was conquered by the Assyrians in the 8th century BC and became part of the Neo-Assyrian Empire during the reign of Tiglath-Pileser III until the late 7th century BC, before passing through the hands of the Neo-Babylonians and the Achaemenid Persians. The region remained known as Aramea and Eber Nari throughout these periods.

Classical antiquity (Beroea)
Alexander the Great took over the city in 333 BC. Seleucus Nicator established a Hellenic settlement in the site between 301 and 286 BC. He called it Beroea (Βέροια), after Beroea in Macedon; it is sometimes spelled as Beroia. Beroea is mentioned in 1 Macc. 9:4.
Northern Syria was the center of gravity of the Hellenistic world and Greek culture in the Seleucid Empire. As did other Greek cities of the Seleucid kingdom, Beroea probably enjoyed a measure of local autonomy, with a local civic assembly or boulē composed of free Hellenes.
Beroea remained under Seleucid rule until 88 BC when Syria was conquered by the Armenian king Tigranes the Great and Beroea became part of the Kingdom of Armenia. After the Roman victory over Tigranes, Syria was handed over to Pompey in 64 BC, at which time they became a Roman province. Rome's presence afforded relative stability in northern Syria for over three centuries. Although the province was administered by a legate from Rome, Rome did not impose its administrative organization on the Greek-speaking ruling class or Aramaic speaking populace.
The Roman era saw an increase in the population of northern Syria that accelerated under the Byzantines well into the 5th century. In Late Antiquity, Beroea was the second largest Syrian city after Antioch, the capital of Roman Syria and the third largest city in the Roman world. Archaeological evidence indicates a high population density for settlements between Antioch and Beroea right up to the 6th century. This agrarian landscape still holds the remains of large estate houses and churches such as the Church of Saint Simeon Stylites.

Ecclesiastical history
The names of several bishops of the episcopal see of Beroea, which was in the Roman province of Syria Prima, are recorded in extant documents. The first whose name survives is that of Saint Eustathius of Antioch, who, after being bishop of Beroea, was transferred to the important metropolitan see of Antioch shortly before the 325 First Council of Nicaea. His successor in Beroea Cyrus was for his fidelity to the Nicene faith sent into exile by the Roman Emperor Constantius II. After the Council of Seleucia of 359, called by Constantius, Meletius of Antioch was transferred from Sebastea to Beroea but in the following year was promoted to Antioch. His successor in Beroea, Anatolius, was at a council in Antioch in 363. Under the persecuting Emperor Valens, the bishop of Beroea was Theodotus, a friend of Basil the Great. He was succeeded by Acacius of Beroea, who governed the see for over 50 years and was at the First Council of Constantinople in 381 and the Council of Ephesus in 431. In 438, he was succeeded by Theoctistus, who participated in the Council of Chalcedon in 451 and was a signatory of the joint letter that the bishops of the province of Syria Prima sent in 458 to Emperor Leo I the Thracian about the murder of Proterius of Alexandria. In 518, Emperor Justin I exiled the bishop of Beroea Antoninus for rejecting the Council of Chalcedon. The last known bishop of the see is Megas, who was at a synod called by Patriarch Menas of Constantinople in 536. After the Arab conquest, Beroea ceased to be a residential bishopric, and is today listed by the Roman Catholic Church as a titular see.
Very few physical remains have been found from the Roman and Byzantine periods in the Citadel of Aleppo. The two mosques inside the Citadel are known to have been converted by the Mirdasids during the 11th century from churches originally built by the Byzantines.

Medieval period
Early Islamic period
The Sasanian Persians led by King Khosrow I pillaged and burned Aleppo in 540, then they invaded and controlled Syria briefly in the early 7th century. Soon after Aleppo was taken by the Rashidun Muslims under Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah in 637. It later became part of Jund Qinnasrin under the Umayyad Caliphate. In 944, it became the seat of an independent Emirate under the Hamdanid prince Sayf al-Dawla, and enjoyed a period of great prosperity, being home to the great poet al-Mutanabbi and the philosopher and polymath al-Farabi. In 962, the city was sacked by the Byzantine general Nikephoros Phokas. Subsequently, the city and its emirate became a temporary vassal of the Byzantine Empire. For the next few decades, the city was disputed by the Fatimid Caliphate and Byzantine Empire, with the nominally independent Hamdanids in between, eventually falling to the Fatimids in 1017. In 1024, Salih ibn Mirdas launched an attack on Fatimid Aleppo, and after a few months was invited into the city by its population. The Mirdasid dynasty then ruled the city until 1080, interrupted only in 1038–1042, when it was in the hands of the Fatimid commander-in-chief in Syria, Anushtakin al-Dizbari, and in 1057–1060, when it was ruled by a Fatimid governor, Ibn Mulhim. Mirdasid rule was marked by internal squabbles between different Mirdasid chieftains that sapped the emirate's power and made it susceptible to external intervention by the Byzantines, Fatimids, Uqaylids, and Turkoman warrior bands.

Seljuq and Ayyubid periods
In late 1077, Seljuk emir Tutush I launched a campaign to capture Aleppo during the reign of Sabiq ibn Mahmud of the Mirdasid dynasty, which lasted until 1080, when his reinforcements were ambushed and routed by a coalition of Arab tribesmen led by Kilabi chief Abu Za'ida at Wadi Butnan. After the death of Sharaf al-Dawla of the Uqaylid dynasty in June 1085, the headman in Aleppo Sharif Hassan ibn Hibat Allah Al-Hutayti promised to surrender the city to Sultan Malik-Shah I. When the latter delayed his arrival, Hassan contacted the Sultan's brother Tutush. However, after Tutush defeated Suleiman ibn Qutulmish, who had intended to take Aleppo for himself, in the battle of Ain Salm, Hassan went back on his commitment. In response, Tutush attacked the city and managed to get hold of parts of the walls and towers in July 1086, but he left in September, either due to the advance of Malik-Shah or because the Fatimids were besieging Damascus. In 1087, Aq Sunqur al-Hajib became the Seljuk governor of Aleppo under Sultan Malik Shah I. During his bid for the Seljuk throne, Tutush had Aq Sunqur executed and after Tutush died in battle, the town was ruled by his son Ridwan.
The city was besieged by Crusaders led by the King of Jerusalem Baldwin II in 1124–1125, but was not conquered after receiving protection by forces of Aqsunqur al Bursuqi arriving from Mosul in January 1125.
In 1128, Aleppo became capital of the expanding Zengid dynasty, which ultimately conquered Damascus in 1154. In 1138, Byzantine emperor John II Komnenos led a campaign, which main objective was to capture the city of Aleppo. On 20 April 1138, the Christian army including Crusaders from Antioch and Edessa launched an attack on the city but found it too strongly defended, hence John II moved the army southward to take nearby fortresses. On 11 October 1138, a deadly earthquake ravaged the city and the surrounding area. Although estimates from this time are very unreliable, it is believed that 230,000 people died, making it the seventh deadliest earthquake in recorded history.
In 1183, Aleppo came under the control of Saladin and then the Ayyubid dynasty. When the Ayyubids were toppled in Egypt by the Mamluks, the Ayyubid emir of Aleppo An-Nasir Yusuf became sultan of the remaining part of the Ayyubid Empire. He ruled Syria from his seat in Aleppo until, on 24 January 1260, the city was taken by the Mongols under Hulagu in alliance with their vassals the Frankish knights of the ruler of Antioch Bohemond VI and his father-in-law the Armenian ruler Hethum I. The city was poorly defended by Turanshah, and as a result the walls fell after six days of siege, and the citadel fell four weeks later. The Muslim population was massacred and many Jews were also killed. The Christian population was spared. Turanshah was shown unusual respect by the Mongols, and was allowed to live because of his age and bravery. The city was then given to the former Emir of Homs, al-Ashraf, and a Mongol garrison was established in the city. Some of the spoils were also given to Hethum I for his assistance in the attack. The Mongol Army then continued on to Damascus, which surrendered, and the Mongols entered the city on 1 March 1260.

Mamluk period
In September 1260, the Egyptian Mamluks negotiated for a treaty with the Franks of Acre which allowed them to pass through Crusader territory unmolested, and engaged the Mongols at the Battle of Ain Jalut on 3 September 1260. The Mamluks won a decisive victory, killing the Mongols' Nestorian Christian general Kitbuqa, and five days later they had retaken Damascus. Aleppo was recovered by the Muslims within a month, and a Mamluk governor placed to govern the city. Hulagu sent troops to try to recover Aleppo in December. They were able to massacre a large number of Muslims in retaliation for the death of Kitbuqa, but after a fortnight could make no other progress and had to retreat.

The Mamluk governor of the city became insubordinate to the central Mamluk authority in Cairo, and in Autumn 1261 the Mamluk leader Baibars sent an army to reclaim the city. In October 1271, the Mongols led by general Samagar took the city again, attacking with 10,000 horsemen from Anatolia, and defeating the Turcoman troops who were defending Aleppo. The Mamluk garrisons fled to Hama, until Baibars came north again with his main army, and the Mongols retreated.
On 20 October 1280, the Mongols took the city again, pillaging the markets and burning the mosques. The Muslim inhabitants fled for Damascus, where the Mamluk leader Qalawun assembled his forces. When his army advanced following the Second Battle of Homs in October 1281, the Mongols again retreated, back across the Euphrates. In October 1299, Ghazan captured the city, joined by his vassal Armenian King Hethum II, whose forces included some Templars and Hospitallers.
In 1400, the Mongol-Turkic leader Tamerlane captured the city again from the Mamluks. He massacred many of the inhabitants, ordering the building of a tower of 20,000 skulls outside the city. After the withdrawal of the Mongols, all the Muslim population returned to Aleppo. On the other hand, Christians who left the city during the Mongol invasion, were unable to resettle back in their own quarter in the old town, a fact that led them to establish a new neighbourhood in 1420, built at the northern suburbs of Aleppo outside the city walls, to become known as al-Jdeydeh quarter ("new district" Arabic: جديدة).

Ottoman era
Aleppo became part of the Ottoman Empire in 1516 as part of the vast expansion of the Ottoman borders during the reign of Selim I. The city then had around 50,000 inhabitants, or 11,224 households according to an Ottoman census. In 1517, Selim I obtained a fatwa from Sunnite religious leaders and unleashed violence on the Alawites, killing 9,400 men, which is known as the Massacre of the Telal. It was the centre of the Aleppo Eyalet; the rest of what later became Syria was part of either the eyalets of Damascus, Tripoli, Sidon or Raqqa. Following the Ottoman provincial reform of 1864 Aleppo became the centre of the newly constituted Vilayet of Aleppo in 1866.
Aleppo's agriculture was well-developed in the Ottoman period. Archaeological excavations revealed water mills in its river basin. Contemporary Chinese source also suggests Aleppo in the Ottoman period had well-developed animal husbandry.
During his travels to the Levant in the 17th century, French traveler Jacques Goujon recounted how the Maronite community in Aleppo, facing financial difficulties and considering conversion to Islam due to their inability to pay the jizya tax, was aided by the Franciscans who bought their church, enabling them to meet their tax obligations.
Moreover, thanks to its strategic geographic location on the trade route between Anatolia and the east, Aleppo rose to high prominence in the Ottoman era, at one point being second only to Constantinople in the empire. By the middle of the 16th century, Aleppo had displaced Damascus as the principal market for goods coming to the Mediterranean region from the east. This is reflected by the fact that the Levant Company of London, a joint-trading company founded in 1581 to monopolize England's trade with the Ottoman Empire, never attempted to settle a factor, or agent, in Damascus, despite having had permission to do so. Aleppo served as the company's headquarters until the late 18th century.

As a result of the economic development, many European states had opened consulates in Aleppo during the 16th and the 17th centuries, such as the consulate of the Republic of Venice in 1548, the consulate of France in 1562, the consulate of England in 1583 and the consulate of the Netherlands in 1613. The Armenian community of Aleppo also rose to prominence in this period as they moved into the city to take up trade and developed the new quarter of Judayda. The most outstanding among Aleppine Armenian merchants during the late 16th and early 17th centuries were Khwaja Petik Chelebi, the richest merchant in the city, and his brother Khwaja Sanos Chelebi, who monopolized Aleppine silk trade and were important patrons of the Armenians.

 
However, the prosperity Aleppo experienced in the 16th and 17th century started to fade as silk production in Iran went into decline with the fall of the Safavid dynasty in 1722. By mid-century, caravans were no longer bringing silk from Iran to Aleppo, and local Syrian production was insufficient for Europe's demand. European merchants left Aleppo and the city went into an economic decline that was not reversed until the mid-19th century when locally produced cotton and tobacco became the principal commodities of interest to the Europeans. According to Halil İnalcık, "Aleppo ... underwent its worst catastrophe with the wholesale destruction of its villages by Bedouin raiding in the later years of the century, creating a long-running famine which by 1798 killed half of its inhabitants."
The economy of Aleppo was badly hit by the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. This, in addition to political instability that followed the implementation of significant reforms in 1841 by the central government, contributed to Aleppo's decline and the rise of Damascus as a serious economic and political competitor with Aleppo. The city nevertheless continued to play an important economic role and shifted its commercial focus from long-distance caravan trade to more regional trade in wool and agricultural products. This period also saw the immigration of numerous "Levantine" (European-origin) families who dominated international trade. Aleppo's mixed commercial tribunal (ticaret mahkamesi), one of the first in the Ottoman Empire, was set up around 1855.

Reference is made to the city in 1606 in William Shakespeare's Macbeth. The witches torment the captain of the ship the Tiger, which was headed to Aleppo from England and endured a 567-day voyage before returning unsuccessfully to port. Reference is also made to the city in Shakespeare's Othello when Othello speaks his final words (ACT V, ii, 349f.): "Set you down this/And say besides that in Aleppo once,/Where a malignant and a turbanned Turk/Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,/I took by th' throat the circumcised dog/And smote him—thus!" (Arden Shakespeare Edition, 2004). The English naval chaplain Henry Teonge describes in his diary a visit he paid to the city in 1675, when there was a colony of Western European merchants living there.

The city remained under Ottoman rule until the empire's collapse, but was occasionally riven with internal feuds as well as attacks of cholera from 1823. Around 20–25 percent of the population died of plague in 1827. In 1850, a Muslim mob attacked Christian neighbourhoods, tens of Christians were killed and several churches looted. Though this event has been portrayed as driven by pure sectarian principles, Bruce Masters argues that such analysis of this period of violence is too shallow and neglects the tensions that existed among the population due to the commercial favor afforded to certain Christian minorities by the Tanzimat Reforms during this time which played a large role in creating antagonism between previously cooperative groups of Muslim and Christians in the eastern quarters of the city. By 1901, the city's population was around 110,000.
In October 1918, Aleppo was captured by Prince Feisal's Sherifial Forces and the 5th Cavalry Division of the Allied forces from the Ottoman Empire during the World War I. At the end of war, the Treaty of Sèvres made most of the Vilayet of Aleppo, including the cities of Urfa, Marash, and Aintab, part of the newly established nation of Syria. However, Kemal Atatürk annexed most of the Vilayet of Aleppo as well as Allied-controlled Cilicia to Turkey in his War of Independence. The Muslim Arab and Kurdish residents in the province supported the Turks in this war against the French, including the leader of the Hananu Revolt, Ibrahim Hananu, who directly coordinated with Atatürk and received weaponry from him. The outcome, however, was disastrous for Aleppo, because as per the Treaty of Lausanne, most of the vilayet was made part of Turkey with the exception of Aleppo and Alexandretta; thus Aleppo was cut from its northern satellites which connected it to the Anatolian cities beyond on which Aleppo depended heavily in commerce. Moreover, the Sykes-Picot division of the Near East separated Aleppo from most of Mesopotamia, including its twin city of Mosul, which also harmed the economy of Aleppo. The outcome of these newly created borders was epochal, as they redirected Syria's would-be capital from Aleppo to Damascus.

French mandate
The State of Aleppo was declared by French General Henri Gouraud in September 1920 as part of a French plan to make Syria easier to administer by dividing it into several smaller states. France became more concerned about the idea of a united Syria after the Battle of Maysaloun.
By separating Aleppo from Damascus, Gouraud wanted to capitalize on a traditional state of competition between the two cities and turn it into political division. The people in Aleppo were unhappy with the fact that Damascus was chosen as capital for the new nation of Syria. Gouraud sensed this sentiment and tried to address it by making Aleppo the capital of a large and wealthier state with which it would have been hard for Damascus to compete. The State of Aleppo as drawn by France contained most of the fertile area of Syria: the fertile countryside of Aleppo in addition to the entire fertile basin of river Euphrates. The state also had access to sea via the autonomous Sanjak of Alexandretta. On the other hand, Damascus, which is basically an oasis on the fringes of the Syrian Desert, had neither enough fertile land nor access to sea. Basically, Gouraud wanted to satisfy Aleppo by giving it control over most of the agricultural and mineral wealth of Syria so that it would never want to unite with Damascus again. Damascus's relative economic weakness was further exacerbated by the economic success of Beirut during the 1920s, a territory part of the larger French Mandate at the time.

The limited economic resources of the Syrian states made the option of completely independent states undesirable for France, because it threatened an opposite result: the states collapsing and being forced back into unity. This was why France proposed the idea of a Syrian federation that was realized in 1923. Initially, Gouraud envisioned the federation as encompassing all the states, even Lebanon. In the end however, only three states participated: Aleppo, Damascus, and the Alawite State. The capital of the federation was Aleppo at first, but it was relocated to Damascus. The president of the federation was Subhi Barakat, an Antioch-born politician from Aleppo.

The federation ended in December 1924, when France merged Aleppo and Damascus into a single Syrian State and separated the Alawite State again. This action came after the federation decided to merge the three federated states into one and to take steps encouraging Syria's financial independence, steps which France viewed as too much.

When the Syrian Revolt erupted in southern Syria in 1925, the French held in Aleppo State new elections that were supposed to lead to the breaking of the union with Damascus and restore the independence of Aleppo State. The French were driven to believe by pro-French Aleppine politicians that the people in Aleppo were supportive of such a scheme. After the new council was elected, however, it surprisingly voted to keep the union with Damascus. Syrian nationalists had waged a massive anti-secession public campaign that vigorously mobilized the people against the secession plan, thus leaving the pro-French politicians no choice but to support the union. The result was a big embarrassment for France, which wanted the secession of Aleppo to be a punitive measure against Damascus, which had participated in the Syrian Revolt, however, the result was respected. This was the last time that independence was proposed for Aleppo.
Bad economic situation of the city after the separation of the northern countryside was exacerbated further in 1939 when Alexandretta was annexed to Turkey as Hatay State, thus depriving Aleppo of its main port of Iskenderun and leaving it in total isolation within Syria.

Post-independence
The increasing disagreements between Aleppo and Damascus led eventually to the split of the National Block into two factions: the National Party, established in Damascus in 1946, and the People's Party, established in Aleppo in 1948 by Rushdi al-Kikhya, Nazim Qudsi and Mustafa Bey Barmada. An underlying cause of the disagreement, in addition to the union with Iraq, was Aleppo's intention to relocate the capital from Damascus. The issue of the capital became an open debate matter in 1950 when the Popular Party presented a constitution draft that called Damascus a "temporary capital."

The first coup d'état in modern Syrian history was carried out in March 1949 by an army officer from Aleppo, Hussni Zaim. However, lured by the absolute power he enjoyed as a dictator, Zaim soon developed a pro-Egyptian, pro-Western orientation and abandoned the cause of union with Iraq. This incited a second coup only four months after his. The second coup, led by Sami Hinnawi (also officer from Aleppo), empowered the Popular Party and actively sought to realize the union with Iraq. The news of an imminent union with Iraq incited a third coup the same year: in December 1949, Adib Shishakly led a coup preempting a union with Iraq that was about to be declared.

Soon after Shishakly's domination ended in 1954, a union with Egypt under Gamal Abdul Nasser was implemented in 1958. The union, however, collapsed three and a half years later when a junta of young Damascene officers carried out a separatist coup. Aleppo resisted the separatist coup, but eventually it had no choice but to recognize the new government.

In March 1963 a coalition of Baathists, Nasserists, and Socialists launched a new coup whose declared objective was to restore the union with Egypt. However, the new government only restored the flag of the union. Soon thereafter disagreement between the Baathists and the Nasserists over the restoration of the union became a crisis, and the Baathists ousted the Nasserists from power. The Nasserists, most of whom were from the Aleppine middle class, responded with an insurgency in Aleppo in July 1963.
Again, the Ba'ath government tried to absorb the dissent of the Syrian middle class (whose center of political activism was Aleppo) by putting to the front Amin al-Hafiz, a Baathist military officer from Aleppo.

President Hafez al-Assad, who came to power in 1970, relied on support from the business class in Damascus. This gave Damascus further advantage over Aleppo, and hence Damascus came to dominate the Syrian economy. The strict centralization of the Syrian state, the intentional direction of resources towards Damascus, and the hegemony Damascus enjoys over the Syrian economy made it increasingly hard for Aleppo to compete. Despite this, Aleppo remained a nationally important economic and cultural center.

On 16 June 1979, thirty-two military cadets were massacred by antigovernmental Islamist rebel group Muslim Brotherhood. In the subsequent violence around fifty people were killed. On 10 July a further twenty-two Syrian soldiers were killed. Both terrorist attacks were part of the Islamist uprising in Syria. In 1980, events escalated into the a large-scale military operation in Aleppo, where Syrian government responded with military and security forces, sending in tens of thousands of troops backed by tanks, armored vehicles and helicopters. Several hundred rebels were killed in and around city and eight thousand were arrested. By February 1981, the Islamist uprising in the city of Aleppo was suppressed.
Since the late 1990s, Aleppo has become one of the fastest growing cities in the Levant and the Middle East. The opening of the industrial city of Shaykh Najjar and the influx of new investments and flow of the new industries after 2004 also contributed to the development of the city. In 2006, Aleppo was named by the Islamic Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (ISESCO) as the capital of Islamic culture.
Before the Syrian civil war, Aleppo was the third largest city in the Middle East after Cairo and Beirut in terms of the number of Christians.

Syrian civil war
On 12 August 2011, some months after protests had begun elsewhere in Syria, anti-government protests were held in several districts of Aleppo, including the city's Sakhour district. During this demonstration, which included tens of thousands of protesters, security forces shot and killed at least twelve people. Two months later, a pro-government demonstration was held in Saadallah Al-Jabiri Square, in the heart of the city. According to the New York Times, the 11 October 2011 rally in support of Bashar al-Assad was attended by large crowds, while state and local media claimed more than 1.5 million attended and stated that it was one of the largest rallies ever held in Syria.
In early 2012, rebels began bombing Aleppo after the spread of anti-government protests. On 10 February 2012, suicide car bombs exploded outside two security compounds — the Military Intelligence Directorate's local headquarters, and a Syrian Internal Security Forces barracks — reportedly killing 28 (four civilians, thirteen military personnel and eleven security personnel) and wounding 235. On 18 March 2012, another car bomb blast in a residential neighbourhood reportedly killed two security personnel and one female civilian, and wounded 30 residents.

In late July 2012, the conflict reached Aleppo in earnest when rebels in the city's surrounding countryside mounted their first offensive there, apparently trying to capitalise on momentum gained during the Damascus assault. Then, some of the civil war's "most devastating bombing and fiercest fighting" took place in Aleppo, often in residential areas. In the summer, autumn and winter of 2012 house-to-house fighting between armed opposition and government forces continued, and by the spring 2013 the Syrian Army had entrenched itself in the western part of Aleppo (government loyalist forces were operating from a military base in the southern part of the city) and the Free Syrian Army in the eastern part with a no man's land between them. One estimate of casualties by an international humanitarian organization is that by this time 13,500 had been killed in the fighting — 1,500 under 5 years of age — and that another 23,000 had been injured. Local police stations in the city, used as bases of government forces and hated and feared by residents, were a focus of much of the conflict.

As a result of the severe battle, many sections in Al-Madina Souq (part of the Old City of Aleppo World Heritage Site), including parts of the Great Mosque of Aleppo and other medieval buildings in the ancient city, were destroyed and ruined or burnt in late summer 2012 as the armed groups of the Syrian Arab Army and the Free Syrian Army fought for control of the city. By March 2013, a majority of Aleppo's factory owners transferred their goods to Turkey with the full knowledge and facilitation of the Turkish government.
A stalemate that had been in place for four years ended in July 2016, when Syrian Army troops closed the last supply line of the rebels into Aleppo with the support of Russian airstrikes. In response, rebel forces launched unsuccessful counter-offensives in September and October that failed to break the siege; in November, government forces embarked on a decisive campaign. The rebels agreed to evacuate from their remaining areas in December 2016. Syrian government victory with Russian aerial bombardment was widely seen as a potential turning point in Syria's civil war. On 22 December, the evacuation was completed with the Syrian Army declaring it had taken complete control of the city. Red Cross later confirmed that the evacuation of all civilians and rebels was complete.
When the battle ended, 500,000 refugees and internally displaced persons returned to Aleppo, and Syrian state media said that hundreds of factories returned to production as electricity supply greatly increased. Many parts of the city that were affected are undergoing reconstruction. On 15 April 2017, a convoy of buses carrying evacuees was attacked by a suicide bomber in Aleppo, killing more than 126 people, including at least 80 children. Syrian state media reported that the Aleppo shopping festival took place on 17 November 2017 to promote industry in the city. A YPG commander stated in February 2018 that Kurdish fighters had shifted to Afrin to help repel the Turkish assault. As a result, he said the pro-Syrian government forces had regained control of the districts previously controlled by them. In February 2020, government forces achieved a major breakthrough when they captured the last remaining rebel-held areas in Aleppo's western periphery, thus decisively ending the clashes that began with the Battle of Aleppo over eight years prior.
The city suffered damage due to the 2023 Turkey-Syria earthquake.

Takeover by Syrian opposition
On 29 November 2024, Syrian opposition groups, led by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, captured the city during the Battle of Aleppo  as part of the offensive in northwestern Syria.

Geography
Aleppo lies about 120 km (75 mi) inland from the Mediterranean Sea, on a plateau 380 m (1,250 ft) above sea level, 45 km (28 mi) east of the Syrian-Turkish border checkpoint of Bab al-Hawa. The city is surrounded by farmlands from the north and the west, widely cultivated with olive and pistachio trees. To the east, Aleppo approaches the dry areas of the Syrian Desert.

The city was founded a few kilometres south of the location of the current old city, on the right bank of Queiq River which arises from the Aintab plateau in the north and runs through Aleppo southward to the fertile country of Qinnasrin. The old city of Aleppo lies on the left bank of the Queiq. It was surrounded by a circle of eight hills surrounding a prominent central hill on which the castle (originally a temple dating to the 2nd millennium BC) was erected. The radius of the circle is about 10 km (6.2 mi). The hills are Tell as-Sawda, Tell ʕāysha, Tell as-Sett, Tell al-Yāsmīn (Al-ʕaqaba), Tell al-Ansāri (Yārūqiyya), ʕan at-Tall, al-Jallūm, Baḥsīta. The old city was enclosed within an ancient wall that was last rebuilt by the Mamluks. The wall has since disappeared. It had nine gates and was surrounded by a broad deep ditch.
Occupying an area of more than 190 km2 (73 sq mi), Aleppo is one of the fastest-growing cities in the Middle East. According to the new major plan of the city adopted in 2001, it is envisaged to increase the total area of Aleppo up to 420 km2 (160 sq mi) by the end of 2015.

Climate
Aleppo has a hot steppe climate (Köppen: BSh). The mountain series that run along the Mediterranean coast, namely the Alawiyin Mountains and the Nur Mountains, largely block the effects of the Mediterranean on climate (rain shadow effect). The average high and low temperature throughout the year is 23.8 and 11.1 °C (74.8 and 52.0 °F). The average precipitation is 329.4 mm (12.97 in). More than 80% of precipitation occurs between October and March. It snows once or twice every winter. Average humidity is 55.7%.

Architecture
Aleppo is characterized with mixed architectural styles, having been ruled by, among others, Romans, Byzantines, Seljuqs, Mamluks and Ottomans.

Various types of 13th and 14th centuries constructions, such as caravanserais, caeserias, Quranic schools, hammams and religious buildings are found in the old city. The quarters of al-Jdayde district are home to numerous 16th and 17th-century houses of the Aleppine bourgeoisie, featuring stone engravings. Baroque architecture of the 19th and early 20th centuries is common in al-Azizyah district, including the Villa Rose. The new Shahbaa district is a mixture of several styles, such as Neo-classic, Norman, Oriental and even Chinese architecture.
Since the old city is characterized with its large mansions, narrow alleys and covered souqs, the modern city's architecture has replenished the town with wide roads and large squares such as the Saadallah Al-Jabiri Square, the Liberty Square, the President's Square and Sabaa Bahrat Square

There is a relatively clear division between old and new Aleppo. The older portions of the city, with an approximate area of 160 ha (0.6 sq mi) are contained within a wall, 5 km (3.1 mi) in circuit with nine gates. The huge medieval castle in the city — known as the Citadel of Aleppo — occupies the center of the ancient part, in the shape of an acropolis.
Being subjected to constant invasions and political instability, the inhabitants of the city were forced to build cell-like quarters and districts that were socially and economically independent. Each district was characterized by the religious and ethnic characteristics of its inhabitants.
The mainly white-stoned old town was built within the historical walls of the city, pierced by the nine historical gates, while the newer quarters of the old city were first built by the Christians during the early 15th century in the northern suburbs of the ancient city, after the Mongol withdrawal from Aleppo. The new quarter known as al-Jdayde is one of the finest examples of a cell-like quarter in Aleppo. After Tamerlane invaded Aleppo in 1400 and destroyed it, the Christians migrated out of the city walls and established their own cell in 1420, at the northwestern suburbs of the city, thus founding the quarters of al-Jdayde. The inhabitants of the new quarters were mainly brokers who facilitated trade between foreign traders and local merchants. As a result of the economic development, many other quarters were established outside the walls of the ancient city during the 15th and 16th centuries.
Thus, the Old City of Aleppo — composed of the ancient city within the walls and the old cell-like quarters outside the walls — has an approximate area of 350 ha (1.4 sq mi) housing more than 120,000 residents.

Demographics
Historical population
According to the Aleppine historian Sheikh Kamel Al-Ghazzi (1853–1933), the population of Aleppo was around 400,000 before the disastrous earthquake of 1822. Followed by cholera and plague attacks in 1823 and 1827 respectively, the population of the city declined to 110,000 by the end of the 19th century. In 1901, the total population of Aleppo was 108,143 of which Muslims were 76,329 (70.58%), Christians — mostly Catholics — 24,508 (22.66%) and Jews 7,306 (6.76%).
Aleppo's large Christian population swelled with the influx of Armenian and Assyrian Christian refugees during the early 20th-century and after the Armenian and Assyrian genocides of 1915. After the arrival of the first groups of Armenian refugees (1915–1922) the population of Aleppo in 1922 counted 156,748 of which Muslims were 97,600 (62.26%), native Christians — mostly Catholics —  22,117 (14.11%), Jews 6,580 (4.20%), Europeans 2,652 (1.70%), Armenian refugees 20,007 (12.76%) and others 7,792 (4.97%). However, even though a large majority of the Armenians arrived during the period, the city has had an Armenian community since at least the 1100s, when a considerable number of Armenian families and merchants from the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia settled in the city. The oldest Armenian church in the city is from 1491 as well, which indicates that they have been there long before.
The second period of Armenian flow towards Aleppo marked with the withdrawal of the French troops from Cilicia in 1923. After the arrival of more than 40,000 Armenian refugees between 1923 and 1925, the population of the city reached up to 210,000 by the end of 1925, of which more than a quarter were Armenians.
According to the historical data presented by Al-Ghazzi, the vast majority of the Aleppine Christians were Catholics until the latter days of the Ottoman rule. The growth of the Oriental Orthodox Christians is related with the arrival of the Assyrian survivors from Cilicia and Southern Turkey, while on the other hand, large numbers of Eastern Orthodox Christians from the Sanjak of Alexandretta arrived in Aleppo, after the annexation of the Sanjak in 1939 in favour of Turkey.

In 1944, Aleppo's population was around 325,000, with 112,110 (34.5%) Christians among which Armenians numbered 60,200. Armenians formed more than half of the Christian community in Aleppo until 1947, when many groups of them left for Soviet Armenia within the frames of the Armenian Repatriation Process (1946–1967).

Pre-civil war status
Aleppo was the most populous city in Syria, with a population of 2,132,100 as indicated in the latest official census in 2004 by the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS). Its subdistrict (nahiya) consisted of 23 localities with a collective population of 2,181,061 in 2004. According to the official estimate announced by the Aleppo City Council, the population of the city was 2,301,570 by the end of 2005. As a result of the Syrian civil war, however, the city eastern half's population under the control of the opposition had plummeted to an estimated 40,000 by 2015.

Muslims
More than 80% of Aleppo's inhabitants are Sunni Muslims. They are mainly Syrian Arabs, followed by Turkmens and Kurds. Other Muslim groups include small numbers of ethnic Circassians, Chechens, Albanians, Bosniaks, Greeks and Bulgarians.

Christians
Until the beginning of the Battle of Aleppo in 2012, the city contained one of the largest Christian communities in the Middle East. There were many Oriental Orthodox Christian congregations, mainly Armenians and Assyrians (locally known as Syriacs). Historically, the city was the main centre of French Catholic missionaries in Syria.
The Christian population of Aleppo was slightly more than 250,000 before the Syrian civil war, representing about 12% of the total population of the city. However, as a consequence of the war, the Christian population of the city decreased to less than 100,000 as of the beginning of 2017, of whom around 30% were ethnic Armenians.
A significant number of the Assyrians in Aleppo speak Aramaic, hailing from the city of Urfa in Turkey. The large community of Oriental Orthodox Christians belongs to the Armenian Apostolic and Syriac Orthodox churches. However, there is a significant presence of the Eastern Orthodox Church of Antioch as well.
There is also a large number Eastern Catholic Christians in the city, including Melkite Greeks, Maronites, Chaldeans, Syrian Catholics and the followers of the Latin Church. Evangelical Christians of different denominations are a minority in the city.
Several districts of the city have a Christian and Armenian majority, such as the old Christian quarter of al-Jdayde. Around 50 churches are operated in the city by the above-mentioned congregations. However, according to the Deputy Chairman of the commission for UNESCO of the Russian Federation, Alexander Dzasokhov, around 20 churches suffered great destruction during the battles in Aleppo, with the most notable being the National Evangelical Church, as well as the surrounding historic churches of al-Jdayde district. On 25 December 2016, following the government victory, Christmas was publicly celebrated in Aleppo for the first time in four years.

Jews
The city was home to a significant Jewish population from ancient times. The Great Synagogue, built in the 5th century, housed the Aleppo Codex. In the 12th century, Benjamin of Tudela recorded that the Jewish community in Aleppo consisted of 5,000 people, calling it one of the largest communities in Bilād al-Shām.
The Jews of Aleppo were known for their religious commitment, Rabbinic leadership, and their liturgy, consisting of Pizmonim and Baqashot. After the Spanish Inquisition, the city of Aleppo received many Sephardic Jewish immigrants, who eventually joined with the native Aleppo Jewish community. Peaceful relations existed between the Jews and surrounding population. In the early 20th century, the town's Jews lived mainly in Al-Jamiliyah, Bab Al-Faraj and the neighbourhoods around the Great Synagogue. Unrest in Palestine in the years preceding the establishment of Israel in 1948 resulted in growing hostility towards Jews living in Arab countries, culminating in the Jewish exodus from Arab lands. In December 1947, after the UN decided the partition of Palestine, an Arab mob attacked the Jewish quarter. Homes, schools and shops were badly damaged. Soon after, many of the town's remaining 6,000 Jews emigrated. In 1968, there were an estimated 700 Jews still remaining in Aleppo.
The houses and other properties of the Jewish families which were not sold after the migration, remain uninhabited under the protection of the Syrian Government. Most of these properties are in Al-Jamiliyah and Bab Al-Faraj areas, and the neighbourhoods around the Central Synagogue of Aleppo. In 1992, the Syrian government lifted the travel ban on its 4,500 Jewish citizens. Most traveled to the United States, where a sizable number of Syrian Jews currently live in Brooklyn, New York. The last Jews of Aleppo, the Halabi family, were evacuated from the city in October 2016 by the Free Syrian Army and now live in Israel.
The Jews from Aleppo referred to their city as "Aram Tzova" (ארם צובא) after the ancient Aramean city of Aram-Zobah mentioned in the Hebrew Bible.

Spoken languages
The Arabic dialect of Aleppo is a type of Syrian Arabic, which is of the North Levantine Arabic variety. Much of its vocabulary is derived from the Syriac language. The Kurdish language is the second most spoken language in the city, after Arabic. Kurds in Aleppo speak the Northern Kurdish (also known as Kurmanji). Syrian Turkmen population of Aleppo speak the Kilis and Antep dialect of the Turkish language. Most Armenians speak the Western form of the Armenian language. The Syriac language is rarely spoken by the Syriac community during daily life, but commonly used as the liturgical language of the Syriac Church. The members of the small Greco-Syrian community in Aleppo speak Arabic. English and French are also spoken.

Culture
Art
Aleppo is considered one of the main centres of Arabic traditional and classic music with the Aleppine Muwashshahs, Qudud Halabiya and Maqams (religious, secular and folk poetic-musical genres). In December 2021, the Qudud Halabiya was included into the UNESCO's intangible cultural heritage list as Intangible cultural heritage.
Aleppines in general are fond of Arab classical music, the Tarab, and it is not a surprise that many artists from Aleppo are considered pioneers among the Arabs in classic and traditional music. The most prominent figures in this field are Sabri Mdallal, Sabah Fakhri, Shadi Jamil, Abed Azrie and Nour Mhanna. Many iconic artists of the Arab music like Sayed Darwish and Mohammed Abdel Wahab were visiting Aleppo to recognize the legacy of Aleppine art and learn from its cultural heritage.
Aleppo is also known for its knowledgeable and cultivated listeners, known as sammi'a or "connoisseur listeners". Aleppine musicians often claim that no major Arab artist achieved fame without first earning the approval of the Aleppine sammi'a.
Aleppo hosts many music shows and festivals every year at the citadel amphitheatre, such as the "Syrian Song Festival", the "Silk Road Festival" and "Khan al-Harir Festival".
Al-Adeyat Archaeological Society founded in 1924 in Aleppo, is a cultural and social organization to preserve the tangible and intangible heritage of Aleppo and Syria in general. The society has branches in other governorates as well.

Museums
National Museum of Aleppo.
Museum of the popular traditions known as the Aleppine House at Beit Achiqbash in al-Jdayde.
Aleppo Citadel Museum.
Museum of medicine and science at Bimaristan Arghun al-Kamili.
Aleppo Memory Museum at Beit Ghazaleh in al-Jdayde.
Zarehian Treasury of the Armenian Apostolic Church at the old Armenian church of the Holy Mother of God, Al-Jdeydeh.

Cuisine
Aleppo is surrounded by olive, nut and fruit orchards, and its cuisine is the product of its fertile land and location along the Silk Road. The International Academy of Gastronomy in France awarded Aleppo its culinary prize in 2007. The city has a wide selection of different types of dishes, such as kebab, kibbeh, dolma, hummus, ful halabi, za'atar halabi, muhshi. Ful halabi is a typical Aleppine breakfast meal: fava bean soup with a splash of olive oil, lemon juice, garlic and Aleppo's red peppers. The za'atar of Aleppo (thyme) is a kind of oregano which is popular in the regional cuisines.

The kibbeh is one of the favourite foods of the locals, and the Aleppines have created more than 17 types of kibbeh dishes, which is considered a form of art for them. These include kibbeh prepared with sumac (kәbbe sәmmāʔiyye), yogurt (kәbbe labaniyye), quince (kәbbe safarjaliyye), lemon juice (kәbbe ḥāmḍa), pomegranate sauce and cherry sauce. Other varieties include the "disk" kibbeh (kәbbe ʔrāṣ), the "plate" kibbeh (kәbbe bәṣfīḥa or kәbbe bṣēniyye) and the raw kibbeh (kәbbe nayye). Kebab Halabi – influenced by Armenian and Turkish tastes – has around 26 variants including: kebab prepared with cherry (kebab karaz), eggplant (kebab banjan), chili pepper with parsley and pine nut (kebab khashkhash), truffle (kebab kamayeh), tomato paste (kebab hindi), cheese and mushroom (kebab ma'juʔa), etc. The favourite drink is Arak, which is usually consumed along with meze, Aleppine kebabs and kibbehs. Al-Shark beer – a product of Aleppo – is also among the favourite drinks. Local wines and brandies are consumed as well.
Aleppo is the origin of different types of sweets and pastries. The Aleppine sweets, such as mabrumeh, siwar es-sett, balloriyyeh, etc., are characterized by containing high rates of ghee butter and sugar. Other sweets include mamuniyeh, shuaibiyyat, mushabbak, zilebiyeh, ghazel al-banat etc. Most pastries contain Aleppine pistachios and other types of nuts.

Leisure and entertainment
Until the break-out of the Battle of Aleppo in July 2012, the city was known for its vibrant nightlife. Several night-clubs, bars and cabarets operated at the centre of the city as well as at the northern suburbs. The historic quarter of al-Jdayde was known for its pubs and boutique hotels, situated within ancient oriental mansions, providing special treats from the Aleppine flavour and cuisine, along with local music.
Club d'Alep, opened in 1945, is a unique social club known for bridge games and other nightlife activities, located in a 19th-century mansion in the Aziziyah district of central Aleppo.
The Aleppo Public Park, opened in 1949, is one of the largest planted parks in Syria, located near in the Aziziyah district, where Queiq River breaks through the green park.
The Blue Lagoon water park – heavily damaged during the battles – was one of the favourite places among the locals, as it was the first water park in Syria. Aleppo's Shahba Mall – one of the largest shopping centres in Syria – was also among the most visited locations for the locals. It has received major damages during the civil war.

Historical sites
Souqs and khans
The city's strategic trading position attracted settlers of all races and beliefs who wished to take advantage of the commercial roads that met in Aleppo from as far as China and Mesopotamia to the east, Europe to the west, and the Fertile Crescent and Egypt to the south. The largest covered souq-market in the world is in Aleppo, with an approximate length of 13 km (8.1 mi).
Al-Madina Souq, as it is locally known, is an active trade centre for imported luxury goods, such as raw silk from Iran, spices and dyes from India, and coffee from Damascus. Souq al-Madina is also home to local products such as wool, agricultural products and soap. Most of the souqs date back to the 14th century and are named after various professions and crafts, hence the wool souq, the copper souq, and so on. Aside from trading, the souq accommodated the traders and their goods in khans (caravanserais) and scattered in the souq. Other types of small market-places were called caeserias (ﻗﻴﺴﺎﺭﻳﺎﺕ). Caeserias are smaller than khans in their sizes and functioned as workshops for craftsmen. Most of the khans took their names after their location in the souq and function, and are characterized by their façades, entrances and fortified wooden doors.

Gates of Aleppo and other historic buildings
The old part of the city is surrounded with 5 km-long (3.1 mi), thick walls, pierced by the nine historical gates (many of them are well-preserved) of the old town. These are, clockwise from the north-east of the citadel:

Bab al-Hadid, Bab al-Ahmar, Bab al-Nairab, Bab al-Maqam, Bab Qinnasrin, Bab Antakeya, Bāb Jnēn, Bab al-Faraj and Bab al-Nasr.
The most significant historic buildings of the ancient city include:

The Citadel, a large fortress built atop a huge, partially artificial mound rising 50 m (160 ft) above the city, dates back to the first millennium BC. Recent excavations unearthed a temple and 25 statues dating back to the first millennium BC. Many of the current structures date from the 13th century. The Citadel had been extensively damaged by earthquakes, notably in 1822.
Al-Shibani building, al-Halawiyah Madrasa, al-Muqaddamiyah Madrasa, al-Zahiriyah Madrasa, al-Sultaniyah Madrasa, al-Firdaws Madrasa, Bimaristan Arghun al-Kamili, Beit Junblatt, Bab al-Faraj Clock Tower, etc.

The following are among the important historic mansions of al-Jdayde Christian quarter:

Beit Wakil, an Aleppine mansion built in 1603, with unique wooden decorations. One of its decorations was taken to Berlin and exhibited in the Museum of Islamic Art, known as the Aleppo Room.
Beit Achiqbash, an old Aleppine house built in 1757. The building is home to the Popular Traditions Museum since 1975, showing fine decorations of the Aleppine art.
Beit Ghazaleh, an old 17th-century mansion characterized with fine decorations, carved by the Armenian sculptor Khachadur Bali in 1691. It was used as an Armenian elementary school during the 20th century.

Places of worship
Great Mosque of Aleppo (Jāmi' Bani Omayya al-Kabīr), founded c. 715 by Umayyad caliph Walid I and most likely completed by his successor Sulayman. The building contains a tomb associated with Zachary, father of John the Baptist. Construction of the present structure for Nur al-Din commenced in 1158. However, it was damaged during the Mongol invasion of 1260 and was rebuilt. The 45 m-high (148 ft) tower (described as "the principal monument of medieval Syria") was erected in 1090–1092 under the first Seljuk sultan, Tutush I. It had four façades with different styles. The tower was completely destroyed during the Syrian civil war in March 2013 (reported on 24 March 2013).
Al-Nuqtah Mosque ("Mosque of the drop [of blood]"), a Shī'ah mosque, which contains a stone said to be marked by a drop of Husayn's blood. The site is believed to have previously been a monastery, which was converted into a mosque in 944.
Al-Shuaibiyah Mosque, Al-Qaiqan Mosque, Mahmandar Mosque, Altun Bogha Mosque, Al-Sahibiyah Mosque, Bahsita Mosque, Al-Tawashi Mosque, Al-Otrush Mosque, Al-Saffahiyah Mosque, Khusruwiyah Mosque, Al-Adiliyah Mosque, Bahramiyah Mosque, etc.
Churches of al-Jdayde quarter: the Forty Martyrs Armenian Apostolic Cathedral, the Dormition of Our Lady Greek Orthodox church, Mar Assia al-Hakim Syrian Catholic church, the Maronite Cathedral of Saint Elijah, the Armenian Catholic Cathedral of Our Mother of Reliefs and the Melkite Greek Catholic Cathedral of Virgin Mary.
Central Synagogue of Aleppo or al-Bandara synagogue, dating to the 9th century. The synagogue was destroyed during an anti-Jewish pogrom in 1947. In the 1980s, the building was restored, but destroyed again during the civil war.

Hammams
Aleppo was home to 177 hammams during the medieval period until the Mongol invasion, when many of the prominent structures of the city were destroyed. Before the civil war, 18 hammams were operating in the old city, including:

Hammam al-Nahhasin built during the 12th century near khan al-Nahhaseen.
Hammam al-Sultan built in 1211 by Az-Zahir Ghazi.
Hammam al-Bayadah of the Mamluk era built in 1450.
Hammam Yalbugha built in 1491 by the Emir of Aleppo Saif ad-Din Yalbugha al-Naseri.
Hammam al-Jawhary, hammam Azdemir, hammam Bahram Pasha, hammam Bab al-Ahmar, etc.
As a city with an ancient architectural style characterized by covered markets, khans, baths, and schools, in addition to mosques and churches, the city is an archaeological treasure in need of continuous care and maintenance. The city was significantly replanned after the end of World War II. In 1954, an architectural plan was adopted by the French architect André Guitton, who proposed the construction of several wide avenues through the city to accommodate the entry of cars. Between 1954 and 1983, many old neighborhoods were demolished under this pretext for expansion, particularly in the northern areas such as Bab al-Faraj and Bab Janin. However, growing awareness of the importance of these buildings ultimately led to the cancellation of Guitton's plan in 1979 and its replacement by a plan by the Swiss urban engineer Stefano Bianco, who launched the idea of preserving the ancient urban fabric of Old Aleppo. This paved the way for UNESCO to include the Old City of Aleppo on the World Heritage List in 1986.

Nearby attractions and the Dead Cities
Aleppo's western suburbs are home to a group of historical sites and villages which are commonly known as the Dead Cities. Around 700 abandoned settlements in the northwestern parts of Syria before the 5th century, contain remains of Christian Byzantine architecture. Many hundreds of those settlements are in Mount Simeon (Jabal Semaan) and Jabal Halaqa regions at the western suburbs of Aleppo, within the range of Limestone Massif. Dead Cities were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2011, under the name of "Ancient Villages of Northern Syria".

The most notable Dead cities and archaeological sites in Mount Simeon and Mount Kurd near Aleppo include: Kalota Castle and churches northwest of Aleppo, Kharab Shams Byzantine basilica of the 4th century, the half-ruined Roman basilica in Fafertin village dating back to 372 AD, the old Byzantine settlement of Surqanya village at the northwest of Aleppo, the 4th-century Basilica of Sinhar settlement, the Mushabbak Basilica dating back to the second half of the 5th century, the 9th-century BC Assyrian settlement of Kafr Nabu, Brad village and the Saint Julianus Maronite monastery (399–402 AD) where the shrine of Saint Maron is located, the 5th-century Kimar settlement of the Roman and Byzantine eras, the Church of Saint Simeon Stylites of the 5th century, the Syro-Hittite Ain Dara temple of the Iron Age dating back to the 10th and 8th centuries BC, the ancient city of Cyrrhus with the old Roman amphitheatre and two historic bridges, etc.

Transportation
Highways and roads
The main highway leading to and within the city is the M4 Highway, which runs in the eastern side of the city from south to north along the Queiq River. Driving south on M4 Highway gives access to M5 Highway leading to Homs, Hama, and Damascus. The northern bypass of the city called Castello Road leads through Azaz to the border with Turkey and further to the city of Gaziantep. Driving east on M4 Highway gives access to the coastal road leading to Latakia and Tartus. Within the city, main routes include Al Jalaa Street, Shukri Al-Quwatly Street, King Faisal Street, Bab Antakya Street, Ibrahim Hanano Street and Tishreen Boulevard.

Public transport
The city of Aleppo is a major transportation hub, served by a comprehensive public transport network of buses and minibuses. New modern buses are used to connect the city with Damascus and the other Syrian cities to the east and the south of Aleppo. The city is also served by local and inter-city share taxis.

Railway
Aleppo was one of the major stations of Syria that was connected to the Baghdad Railway in 1912, within the Ottoman Empire. The connections to Turkey and onwards to Ankara still exist today, with a twice weekly train from Damascus. It is perhaps for this historical reason that Aleppo is the headquarters of Syria national railway network, Chemins de Fer Syriens. As the railway is relatively slow, much of the passenger traffic to the port of Latakia had moved to road-based air-conditioned coaches. But this has reversed in recent years with the 2005 introduction of South Korean built DMUs providing a regular bi-hourly express service to both Latakia and Damascus, which miss intermediate stations.
However, after the break-out of the civil war in 2011, the Syrian railway network has suffered major damage and is partially out of use. Reconstruction of the Damascus-Aleppo railway line was started in 2020, after its completion and securing rail transport will be resumed.
The opening scene in Agatha Christie's Murder on the Orient Express takes place on the railway station in Aleppo: "It was five o'clock on a winter's morning in Syria. Alongside the platform at Aleppo stood the train grandly designated in railway guides as the Taurus Express."

Airport
Aleppo International Airport (IATA: ALP, ICAO: OSAP) is the international airport serving the city. The airport serves as a secondary hub for Syrian Air. The history of the airport dates back to the beginning of the 20th century. It was upgraded and developed in the years to 1999 when the new current terminal was opened.
The airport was closed since the beginning of 2013 as a result of the military operations in the area. However, following the Syrian government's recapture of eastern Aleppo during the Battle of Aleppo, an airplane conducted its first flight from the airport in four years.

Economy
Trade and industry
The main role of the city was as a trading place throughout the history, as it sat at the crossroads of two trade routes and mediated the trade from India, the Tigris and Euphrates regions and the route coming from Damascus in the South, which traced the base of the mountains rather than the rugged seacoast. Although trade was often directed away from the city for political reasons , it continued to thrive until the Europeans began to use the Cape route to India and later to use the route through Egypt to the Red Sea.
The commercial traditions in Aleppo have deep roots in the history. The Aleppo Chamber of commerce founded in 1885, is one of the oldest chambers in the Middle East and the Arab world. According to many historians, Aleppo was the most developed commercial and industrial city in the Ottoman Empire after Constantinople and Cairo. However the post-Ottoman conditions favored other cities, such as Haifa, whose economy thrived more in the new circumstances. The issue was that the city's hinterland wasn't included in the "customs-free zone" between the newly established British and French mandates which hurt the city's economic growth.

As the largest urban area in pre-civil war Syria, Aleppo was considered the capital of Syrian industry. The economy of the city was mainly driven by textiles, chemicals, pharmaceutics, agro-processing industries, electrical commodities, alcoholic beverages, engineering and tourism. It occupied a dominant position in the country's manufacturing output, with a share of more than 50% of manufacturing employment, and an even greater export share.

Possessing the most developed commercial and industrial plants in Syria, Aleppo is a major centre for manufacturing precious metals and stones. The annual amount of the processed gold produced in Aleppo is around 8.5 tonnes, making up to 40% of the entire manufactured gold in Syria.
The industrial city of Aleppo in Sheikh Najjar district is one of the largest in Syria and the region. Occupying an area of 4,412 ha (10,900 acres) in the north-eastern suburbs of Aleppo, the total investments in the city counted more than US$3.4 billion during 2010. Still under development, it is envisaged to open hotels, exhibition centres and other facilities within the industrial city.
In July 2022, the Aleppo Thermal Power Plant, which generates 200 megawatts of electricity for the city and its surroundings, was put into partial operation after restoration.
The old traditional crafts are well-preserved in the old part of the city. The famous laurel soap of Aleppo is considered to be the world's first hard soap.

Construction
In the 2000s, Aleppo was one of the fastest-growing cities in Syria and the Middle East. Many villagers and inhabitants of other Syrian districts are migrating to Aleppo in an effort to find better job opportunities, a fact that always increases population pressure, with a growing demand for new residential capacity. New districts and residential communities have been built in the suburbs of Aleppo, many of them were still under construction as of 2010.
Two major construction projects are scheduled in Aleppo: the "Old City Revival" project and the "Reopening of the stream bed of Queiq River":

The Old City revival project completed its first phase by the end of 2008, and the second phase started in early 2010. The purpose of the project is the preservation of the old city of Aleppo with its souqs and khans, and restoration of the narrow alleys of the old city and the roads around the citadel.
The restoration of Queiq River is directed towards the revival of the flow of the river, demolishing both the artificial cover of the stream bed and the reinforcement of the stream banks along the river in the city centre. The flow of the river was blocked during the 1960s by the Turks, turning the river into a tiny sewage channel, something that led the authorities to cover the stream during the 1970s. In 2008 the flow of pure water was restored through the efforts of the Syrian government, granting a new life to the Quweiq River.
Like other major Syrian cities, Aleppo is suffering from the dispersal of informal settlements: almost half of its population (around 1.2 million) is estimated to live in 22 informal settlements of different types.

Education
As the main economic centre of Syria, Aleppo has a large number of educational institutions. According to the UNICEF, there are around over 1280 schools in Aleppo and its suburbs that welcomed 485,000 new students as of September 2018, and around 25,000 students resumed their learning as of December 2021.
Not to mention there are some colleges. In addition to the University of Aleppo, there are state colleges and private universities which attract large numbers of students from other regions of Syria and the Arab countries. The number of the students in Aleppo University is more than 60,000. The university has 18 faculties and 8 technical colleges in the city of Aleppo.
Currently, there are two private universities operating in the city: al-Shahba University (SU) and Mamoun University for Science and Technology (MUST). Branches of the state conservatory and the fine arts school are also operating in the city.
Aleppo is home to several Christian schools, such as St. Mariam's Christian School (the city's main Christian school) and Armenian private schools as well as two international schools: International School of Aleppo and Lycée Français d'Alep.

Sport
The city of Aleppo is considered as important centre of team sports with football being the most popular in the city. The five major sporting clubs of the city are al-Ittihad SC, al-Hurriya SC, al-Yarmouk SC, Jalaa SC and Ouroube SC. Many other sport clubs are located in several districts of the city including al-Herafyeen SC, Shorta Aleppo SC, Ommal Aleppo SC, Nayrab SC, al-Shahbaa SC, al-Qala'a SC and Aleppo Railways SC.

Basketball is also played in the city. All of the 5 Aleppine major sport clubs participate in the men's and women's top division of the Syrian Basketball League, in which both Jalaa SC and Al-Ittihad SC consecutively dominated winning the league from 1956 to 1993.
In July 2022, international qualifying matches were played in Aleppo for the first time since the beginning of the conflict. In the Hamadaniah Arena, the Syrian national team met the teams of Iran and Bahrain as part of the qualification for the World Cup.
Other sports being practiced by the major clubs in the city include tennis, handball, volleyball, athletics, table tennis and swimming.
With a capacity of 53,200 seats, the Aleppo International Stadium is the largest sports venue in Syria. Other major sport venues in the city include the Al-Hamadaniah Sports Arena, Bassel al-Assad Swimming Complex, and Al-Hamadaniah Olympic Swimming and Diving Complex.
On 29 January 2017, Aleppo hosted the first sports event since 2012, when the local football rivals al-Ittihad SC and al-Hurriya SC played at the Ri'ayet al-Shabab Stadium, within the frames of the 2016–17 Syrian Premier League.

Municipality
The city of Aleppo is the capital of Aleppo Governorate and the centre of Mount Simeon District. Aleppo City Council is the governing body of the city. The first municipality council was formed in 1868. However, the governor being appointed directly by the president of the republic, has a supreme authority over the city and the entire governorate. But the city is managed directly by the mayor.

Subdivisions
Districts in Aleppo can be considered in four categories:

Old quarters inside the walls of the ancient city.
Old quarters outside the walls of the ancient city.
Modern neighborhoods, including a newly developed area called The New Aleppo.
Informal settlements.

Integrated Urban Development in Aleppo
The "Integrated Urban Development in Aleppo" (UDP) is a joint programme between the German Development Cooperation (GTZ) and the Municipality of Aleppo. The programme promotes capacities for sustainable urban management and development at the national and municipal level.
The Programme has three fields of work:

Aleppo City Development Strategy (CDS): promoting support structures for the municipality, including capacity building, networking, and developing municipal strength in the national development dialogue.
Informal Settlements (IS): includes strategy and management development of informal settlements.
The Project for the Rehabilitation of the Old City of Aleppo (OCA): includes further support for the rehabilitation of the Old City, as well as for a city development strategy oriented to the long term.
The UDP cooperates closely with other interventions in the sector, namely the EU-supported 'Municipal Administration Modernization' programme. It is planned to operate from 2007 to 2016.

Preservation of the ancient city
As an ancient trading centre, Aleppo has impressive souqs, khans, hammams, madrasas, mosques and churches, all in need of more care and preservation work. After World War II the city was significantly redesigned; in 1954 French architect André Gutton had a number of wide new roads cut through the city to allow easier passage for modern traffic. Between 1954 and 1983 many buildings in the old city were demolished to allow for the construction of modern apartment blocks, particularly in the northwestern areas (Bab al-Faraj and Bab al-Jinan). As awareness for the need to preserve this unique cultural heritage increased, Gutton's master plan was finally abandoned in 1979 to be replaced with a new plan presented by the Swiss expert and urban designer Stefano Bianca, which adopted the idea of "preserving the traditional architectural style of Ancient Aleppo" paving the way for UNESCO to declare the Old City of Aleppo as a World Heritage Site in 1986.

Several international institutions have joined efforts with local authorities and the Aleppo Archaeological Society, to rehabilitate the old city by accommodating contemporary life while preserving the old one. The governorate and the municipality are implementing serious programmes directed towards the enhancement of the ancient city and Jdeydeh quarter.
The German Technical Cooperation (GTZ) and Aga Khan Foundation (within the frames of Aga Khan Historic Cities Programme) has made a great contribution in the preservation process of the old city.

Twin towns – sister cities
Aleppo is twinned with:

 Brest, Belarus (2010)
 Gaziantep, Turkey (2005, 2025)
 Izmir, Turkey (1995)
 Lyon, France (2000)
 Osmangazi, Turkey (2010)

Notable people
See also
Pinus halepensis
Tulipa aleppensis
Aleppo Room
Jaysh Muhammad in Bilad al-Sham

Notes
References
Bibliography
Basan, Osman Aziz (2010). The Great Seljuqs: A History. Taylor & Francis.
Beihammer, Alexander Daniel (2017). Byzantium and the Emergence of Muslim Turkish Anatolia, ca. 1040-1130. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-138-22959-4.
Bianquis, Thierry (1993). "Mirdās, Banū or Mirdāsids". In Bosworth, C. E.; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W. P. & Pellat, Ch. (eds.). The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Volume VII: Mif–Naz. Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp. 115–123. ISBN 978-90-04-09419-2.
Burns, Ross (2016). Aleppo, A History. Routledge. ISBN 9780415737210.
Carré, Olivier; Michaud, Gérard (1983). Les Frères musulmans: Egypte et Syrie (1928–1982). Paris: Gallimard. ISBN 9782070259847.
Demurger, Alain (2007). Jacques de Molay (in French). Editions Payot&Rivages. ISBN 978-2-228-90235-9.
Elliott, Simon (2020). Old Testament Warriors: The Clash of Cultures in the Ancient Near East. Casemate Publishers. ISBN 978-1612009544.
Runciman, Steven (1952). A History of the Crusades, Volume II: The Kingdom of Jerusalem and the Frankish East, 1100-1187. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. (1990 reprint paperback ISBN 978-0140137040)
Runciman, Steven (1987). A History of the Crusades: Volume 3, The Kingdom of Acre and the Later Crusades. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521347723.
Seale, Patrick (1989). Asad of Syria: the struggle for the Middle East (1st ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-06667-7. OCLC 19130614.
Zakkar, Suheil (1969). The Emirate of Aleppo 392/1002–487/1094 (PDF) (PhD). London: University of London.

External links

Aleppo Governorate
Aleppo news
Aleppo history and culture Archived 28 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Photos of Aleppo at the American Center of Research


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 9,075
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%AD%D9%84%D8%A8
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

حَلَب هي مدينة في شمال سوريا وهي مركز محافظة حلب التي تعد أكبر المحافظات السورية من ناحية تعداد السكان بعدد سكان رسمي يفوق 4.045 مليون (تقديرات 2004) كما أنها تعتبر العاصمة الاقتصادية لسوريا. تقع شمال غرب سوريا على بعد 310 كم (193 ميلاً) من دمشق. كما أنها تعد أكبر مدن بلاد الشام،  وكانت عاصمة لمملكة يمحاض الأمورية، وتعاقبت عليها بعد ذلك حضاراتٌ عدة مثل الحثية و‌الآرامية و‌الآشورية و‌الفارسية و‌الهيلينية و‌الرومانية و‌البيزنطية والإسلامية. وفي العصر العباسي برزت حلب كعاصمة للدولة الحمدانية التي امتدت من حلب إلى الجزيرة الفراتية و‌الموصل. تعد حلب واحدة من أقدم المدن المأهولة في العالم وثاني اقدم مدن سوريا بعد العاصمة دمشق وذلك منذ بداية الألفية السادسة قبل الميلاد، حيث أظهرت الحفريات في تل السودة وتل الأنصاري الواقعتين جنوب المدينة القديمة أن المنطقة كانت قد احتلت في الجزء الأخير من الألفية الثالثة على الأقل  ويظهر هذا في أول ذكر لحلب في الألواح المسمارية المكتشفة في مملكة إيبلا و‌بلاد الرافدين حيث لوحظ تفوقها العسكري والتجاري. مثل هذا التاريخ ربما يرجع إلى كونها نقطة تجارية إستراتيجية في منتصف الطريق بين البحر الأبيض المتوسط و‌بلاد الرافدين وفي كونها في نهاية طريق الحرير الذي يمر عبر آسيا الوسطى و‌بلاد الرافدين. وبقيت حلب لقرون أكبر المدن السورية وثالث مدينة في الدولة العثمانية بعد إسطنبول و‌القاهرة. تحولت التجارة إلى البحر عندما تم افتتاح قناة السويس عام 1869 وبدأت أهمية حلب بالتراجع بشكل بطيء. تلقت حلب أكبر الضربات عند بداية القرن العشرين، فعند سقوط الخلافة العثمانية بعد الحرب العالمية الأولى سلخت عن حلب أجزاؤها الشمالية (معظمها ضمن الأقاليم السورية الشمالية) التي ضمت إلى تركيا عام 1920 بالاتفاق بين أتاتورك و‌سلطات الانتداب الفرنسي. خسرت حلب التجارة مع مدن هذه الأقاليم خاصة المدن التي كانت تابعة لولاية حلب تاريخيا كعنتاب و‌مرعش و‌أضنة و‌مرسين، كما خسرت السكك الحديدية المهمّة التي كانت تصلها بالموصل. أدت اتفاقية سايكس بيكو وفصل العراق عن سورية إلى كساد وتدهور كبير في اقتصاد حلب. وفي عام 1940 فقدت حلب إمكانية وصولها إلى البحر بعد خسارتها لمنفذها الرئيسي على البحر الأبيض المتوسط في الإسكندرونة. تراجع موقع حلب السياسي بسبب جعل مدينة دمشق عاصمة لسوريا. رغم كل هذه الضربات، بقيت هذه المدينة عاصمة اقتصادية لسوريا، فهي تضم أهم المعامل الصناعية وهي أيضا تشكل مركزا للمناطق الزراعية في سوريا، وخاصة زراعة القطن الضرورية لمعامل النسيج المزدهرة في المدينة. كانت حلب وريفها تعطي معظم الناتج الإجمالي السوري حتى نهاية الخمسينات  أصبحت المدينة القديمة في مدينة حلب من مواقع التراث العالمي اليونسكو في عام 1986. وقد نالت المدينة لقب عاصمة الثقافة الإسلامية عن الوطن العربي في عام 2006 م. وخلال أحداث الأزمة السورية، تضررت حلب بشكل كبير إنسانيا واقتصاديا بفعل القتال والقصف ونقل المعامل إلى تركيا، وتوقفت عجلة الاقتصاد في المدينة وتعرض الكثير من معالمها الأثرية للدمار مثل مئذنة المسجد الأموي واحتراق معظم أسواق حلب القديمة.

التسمية
كما هو حال معظم المدن القديمة، هنالك عدة نظريات حول اسم المدينة حيث ذكرت في الكثير من المخطوطات والوثائق التاريخية القديمة؛ وقد ورد ذكر حلب في رُقم مملكة إبلا باسم أرمان في عهد ريموش بن سرجون الأكدي في الألف الثالث قبل الميلاد.
بينما يرى البعض أنها وردت باسم آران على مسلة نارام سين في ديار بكر والتي تعود للألف الثالث قبل الميلاد وسميت باسم هليا في مخلفات مملكة ماري (تل الحريري) ودعيت حلبو عندما كانت عاصمة لمملكة يمحاض الأمورية في حوالي 1800 قبل الميلاد بينما أطلقت عليها الكتابات الآشورية خلابا وخلوان.
وذكرت حلب منذ القرن السادس عشر قبل الميلاد باسم خرب في الآثار المصرية. وقد ورد اسم خلبو في إحدى النصوص التي تعود إلى زمن رمسيس الثاني، بينما أظهر نص آخر يعود إلى ذات العهد لفظ حلبو حيث خسر ملكها أمام رمسيس الثاني نتيجة لتدخله لصالح ملوك الحيثيون على المصريين في معركة قادش.بينما عرفت المدينة باسم بيروا Beroe إبان قيام دولة السلوقيين عقب انقسام إمبراطورية الإسكندر المقدوني. بينما يعتقد آخرون أن سلوقس الأول نيكاتور مؤسس الحكم السلوقي أطلق على المدينة عام 312 قبل الميلاد اسم Bereoa بيروا وتلفظ بالفرنسية بيريه BERE، على اسم مسقط رأس فيليب الثاني المقدوني والد الإسكندر المقدوني، وبقيت حلب تحمل هذا الاسم طيلة العصور اليونانية والرومانية والبيزنطية.اختلفت وجهات النظر حول اسم حلب ذاته حيث أن البعض عزا الاسم إلى تعريب كلمة حلبا السريانية التي تعني البيضاء فقيل حلب. وقال البعض الآخر بأن لفظة حلب آرامية وأن الآشوريين والمصريين الأقدمين سموها حلبو. بينما ذكر أحد مؤرخي المدينة وهو خير الدين الأسدي أن أصل كلمة حلب يعود إلى حَلْ رب فيقال حَلْ لَب حيث أن معنى كلمة حَلْ هو المحل وكلمة لَبْ هو التجمع فيصبح معنى كلمة حلب هو موضع التجمع. وقد ذكرت المدينة أيضاً باسم آرام صوبا حيث ورد هذا الاسم في سِفر الملوك الثاني من كتاب العهد القديم. أما لفظة الشهباء ففسرها البعض بأنها من الشهب وهو البياض يتخلله السواد، حيث لقبت بهذا اللقب لبياض تربتها وحجارتها. ويرجح آخرون بأن أصل كلمة الشهباء يعود إلى بقرة شهباء قيل أن النبي إبراهيم كان يحلبها فقيل حلب الشهباء، وقد قوبل هذا الطرح بالعديد من الانتقادات من المؤرخين الذين اعتبروه محض أسطورة تنافي العلم والمنطق. بالنسبة للاسم في اللغات الأجنبية، يتم استخدام كلٍ من Alep وAleppo دون تمييز رغم أن Aleppo هي عبارة عن نسخةٍ إيطالية من الاسم في الأساس.

التاريخ
عصور ما قبل التاريخ
نادراً ما تم التطرق إلى حلب من قبل علماء الآثار، حيث أن المدينة الحديثة تحتل ذات الموقع الذي كانت تحتله المدينة القديمة، وقد أظهرت الحفريات في تل السودا أن المدينة احتلت هذا الموقع منذ حوالي الـ 5000 سنة.

عصر البرونز
وصفت حلب في السجلات التاريخية كمدينة هامة في وقت متاخر مقارنة بدمشق، والتي سبقتها ببضعة الاف من السنين فقط .. وتكتسب مدينة  حلب العريقة اهميتها التاريخية بكونها ثاني اقدم المدن السورية بعد مدينة دمشق حيث أن حلب ذكرت للمرة الأولى في الألف الثالث قبل الميلاد، عندما كانت عاصمة مملكة مستقلة مرتبطة بإبلا هي مملكة أرمان أو أرمي كما سميت في إبلا وأرماني كما سميت من قبل الأكديين. حيث يصف عالم الآثار جوفاني بيتيناتو مملكة أرمان بأنها كانت تشبه مملكة إبلا في النرجسية. قام نارام سين الأكادي بتدمير كلتا المملكتين إبلا وأرمان في القرن الثالث وعشرين قبل الميلاد.

العصر البرونزي المتوسط
في فترة الدولة البابلية القديمة، ظهرت تسمية حلبا لأول مرة. وكانت وقتها عاصمةً لسلالة العموريين لمملكة يمحاض (حوالي 1800-1600 قبل الميلاد) والمعروفة أيضاً باسم أرض حلب كانت الأقوى في الشرق الأدنى آنذاك. دمرت على أيدي الحثيين تحت قيادة مرسيليس الأول في القرن الـ 16 قبل الميلاد. ومع ذلك، ما لبثت حلب أن استعادت دورها الريادي في سوريا بعدما خفّت القوة الحيثيون في المنطقة نتيجة للصراعات الداخلية.

العصر البرونزي المتأخر
قام الملك الميتاني بارشطار ملك إحدى الممالك الحورية باستغلال فراغ السلطة الناجم عن ضعف الحثيين وغزا حلب في القرن الخامس عشر قبل الميلاد، لتجد حلب نفسها على خط المواجهة ما بين مملكة الميتانيين والحيثيين ومصر. واستعاد الملك الحثي سابيليوليوما الأول حلب من بين أيدي الميتانيين في القرن الرابع عشر قبل الميلاد، فقد كان لحلب أهمية مقدسة لدى الحيثيون وغدت مركز عبادة إله العاصفة المقدس.

العصر الحديدي
عندما انهارت مملكة الحيثيون في القرن الثاني عشر قبل الميلاد، أصبحت حلب جزءاً من مملكة أرفاد الآرامية السور-حيثية (والمعروفة أيضاً باسم بيت اغوشي والتي تعرف في هذه الأيام بتل رفعت) في بداية الألفية الأولى قبل الميلاد. كما وأصبحت عاصمة في نهايات القرن 9 قبل الميلاد. أصبحت حلب قسماً من الإمبراطورية الآشورية الثانية، قبل أن تسقط في يد المملكة البابلية الثانية، والإمبراطورية الأخمينيية الفارسية.

العهد الهيليني والروماني والفارسي
استولى الإسكندر المقدوني على المدينة عام 333 ق.م، وأقام سلوقس الأول مستعمرةً هيلينية في المدينة بين 301-286 قبل الميلاد، وسماها بيرويا على اسم مدينة بيرويا في مقدونيا.
استمرت بيرويا تحت حكم السلوقيين مدة 300 عام حتى سلمها آخر سلالتهم للقائد بومبيوس الكبير عام 64 قبل الميلاد، وأصبحت بذلك جزءاً من مقاطعة سوريا الرومانية. ظلت المدينة تحت الحكم الروماني ثلاثة قرونٍ أخرى، رغم أن روما لم تفرض عليها أسلوب الإدارة الرومانية نظراً لأنها مقاطعة إغريقية قديمة يتكلم سكانها اللغة اليونانية. كانت حلب وقتها أو بيرويا المدينة الثانية من حيث الأهمية في سوريا بعد أنطاكية في القرن 6. وتحفل المنطقة بالعديد من اللقى الأثرية والأديرة والكنائس لعل أشهرها دير مار سمعان العمودي أو سان سيمون، و‌ضريح مار مارون حيث يوجد قبر مؤسس الطائفة القديس مارون في منطقة براد غرب حلب. ذكرت بيرويا أيضاً مرتين في العهد القديم في السفر 13:3.
سقطت حلب أيضاً في يد الإمبراطورية الساسانية عندما غزت سوريا في بدايات القرن السابع.

عهد الفتح الإسلامي
فتحت مدينة حلب بقيادة أبو عبيدة بن الجراح وخالد بن الوليد عام 637 ميلادي، لتشكل جزءاً من دولة الخلافة الراشدة ثم الأموية ومن بعدها العباسية. وفي عام 944 غدت عاصمة الدولة الحمدانية تحت حكم سيف الدولة الحمداني، عاشت المدينة عصراً ذهبياً أيام الأمير سيف الدولة وكانت أحد الثغور الهامة للدفاع عن العالم الإسلامي في وجه المد البيزنطي، احتلت المدينة لفترة قصيرة بين عامي 974 و987، أثناء الصراع البيزنطي السلجوقي، تمت محاصرة حلب أيضاً مرتين أثناء الحروب الصليبية عامي 1098 و1124 إلا أن الجيوش الصليبية لم تتمكن من احتلالها لمناعة تحصينها.
في 9 آب عام 1138، تعرضت المدينة لزلزال مدمرٍ دمرها والمناطق المحيطة، ويصنف على أنه الزلزال الخامس من بين الزلازل التاريخية الأشد دماراً في العصور القديمة.

عهد الغزو المغولي والدفاع الأيوبي
انضوت المدينة تحت حكم صلاح الدين في عهد الدولة الأيوبية منذ عام 1183.في 24 كانون الثاني لعام 1260، تم احتلال المدينة من قبل المغول تحت قيادة هولاكو  بالتعاون مع حاكم أنطاكية بوهيموند السادس، دافعت عن المدينة حامية متواضعة من قبل الملك الأيوبي غياث الدين طوران شاه وسقطت المدينة بعد 6 أيامٍ من القصف المستمر بالمنجنيقات، وسقطت القلعة بعدها بأربعة أسابيع، تم ذبح السكان بوحشية. إلا أن الملك طوران شاه لم يذبح وأبدي له احترام لبسالته على غير عادة المغول. وتابع بعدها الجيش المغولي تقدمه نحو دمشق ليحاصرها ويقتحمها هي الأخرى في 1 آذار عام 1260.
استعاد المملوكيون زمام المبادرة بعد انتصارهم في موقعة عين جالوت في 3 أيلول / سبتمبر عام 1260 بقيادة الملك المظفر سيف الدين قطز وتم قتل القائد النسطوري كتبغا الموالي لهولاكو واستعادة دمشق بعدها بخمسة أيام وحلب بعدها بشهر.
استقلت حلب عن الدولة المملوكية المركزية في القاهرة عندما قام الملك الظاهر بيبرس المملوكي بإعلان الانفصال، وأرسل قواته في خريف عام 1261 لاستعادة المدينة. في تشرين الأول لعام 1271 هاجم المغول مرةً أخرى حلب بجيشٍ يضم عشرة آلاف فارس قادمين من الأناضول بعد هزيمتهم للتركمان الذين حاولوا المساعدة في حماية المدينة، ونجحوا في احتلالها وتقدموا نحو حماة، لكن الظاهر بيبرس أعد جيشاً قويا تمكن من إجبار المغول على الجلاء عن حلب مرة أخرى.
استولى المغول مجدداً على المدينة في 20 تشرين الأول 1280، وعاثوا فيها فساداً وتدميراً في الجوامع والأسواق، وهرب السكان نحو دمشق، ليقوم القائد المملوكي المنصور سيف الدين قلاوون بتجهيز قواته للرد، وما إن رأى المغول الجحافل تتقدم حتى تراجعوا هرباً إلى ما بعد نهر الفرات.
عادت حلب للحكم الذاتي إذاً عام 1317. وفي عام 1400 قام القائد المغولي تيمورلنك بأسر المدينة  وذبح الكثير من السكان ويقال بأنه أمر ببناء تلة من جماجم السكان استخدم فيها عشرين ألف جمجمة ، وبعد تراجع المغوليين، عاد السكان المسلمون خاصةً ليحتموا في المدينة، أما المسيحيون فقد قام بعضهم ممن لم يستطيعوا الدخول مرة أخرى بإنشاء حي جديد عام 1420 خارج حدود السور الشمالي تم تسميته بالحي الجديد أو الجديدة. ولعبوا دور همزة الوصل في التجارة بين تجار حلب والمحيط الخارجي لتمتعهم بحماية نسبية من قبل الممالك الصليبية في القدس وأنطاكية.

الفترة العثمانية
أضحت حلب جزءاً من الدولة العثمانية عام 1516، وكان تعداد السكان في نفس الفترة حوالي 50000 نسمة، وكانت مركز ولاية حلب وعاصمة سوريا.
نظراً لموقعها الاستراتيجي القريب من الأناضول، لعبت حلب دوراً محورياً في الدولة العثمانية، وكانت المدينة الثانية بعد القسطنطينية، والمدينة الرئيسية للتجارة بين بلاد الشرق والغرب. وإذا كانت السفارات الغربية واقعة في إسطنبول، فإنّ المهام القنصلية الرئيسية كانت تتم في حلب، وابتداءً من القرن الثامن عشر بشكل خاص بدأ القناصل والتجار الأوروبيون يتمنون السكن في حلب مع عائلاتهم مؤسسين بذلك سلالات راسخة. لكن الاقتصاد في المدينة تأثر بشدة بعد افتتاح قناة السويس عام 1869، حيث انتعشت دمشق اقتصادياً وعادت لها أهميتها الحيوية كمركز العاصمة السورية مرة أخرى بعد أفول نجمها كما في أيام الأمويين والأيوبيين.

من الشواهد على ذيوع صيت حلب في تلك الفترة ذكرها مرتين في قصص السير وليم شكسبير عام 1606 في قصة ماكبث. اسشتهاد آخر نراه في قصة عطيل.

استمرت المدينة تحت الحكم العثماني حتى انهيار الإمبراطورية. مع نهاية الحرب العالمية الأولى، حددت معاهدة سيفر مقاطعة حلب كجزء من سوريا، بينما تم وعد الأرمن بتحقيق استقلال هضبة أرمينيا من قبل فرنسا في المعاهدة الفرنسية الأرمنية المبرمة عام 1916، لكن مصطفى كمال أتاتورك رفض هذه المعاهدة واستمر بضم حلب والأناضول وأرمينيا إلى تركيا وخاض حروباً لاستقلال التراب التركي، وقد دعم السكان العرب والأكراد في المدينة النضال التركي بدايةً ضد الفرنسيين باعتقادهم أنه سيجلب لهم الاستقلال، ومن أشهرهم إبراهيم هنانو الذي قام بالتنسيق في فترة من الفترات مع كمال أتاتورك، لكن النهاية جاءت كارثية على حلب؛ فمع عقد معاهدة لوزان تم انتزاع معظم مقاطعة حلب باستثناء حلب نفسها ولواء الإسكندرونة، وهكذا تم سلخ حلب عن الأناضول ومدنه التي كانت تضمها علاقات تجارية مكثفة. الأسوأ من ذلك كان معاهدة سايكس - بيكو التي قسمت بلاد الشام وفصلتها عن العراق. وزادت عزلة حلب أكثر بعد أن تم أيضاً سلخ لواء الإسكندرونة عام 1939، فتم حرمان حلب من مينائها الرئيسي ليجعلها معزولة تماماً.

مرحلة الانتداب الفرنسي
قامت ولاية حلب بعد إعلان الجنرال الفرنسي هنري غورو في أيلول عام 1920 الانتداب الفرنسي على سوريا والذي قسم البلد لدويلات لتسهيل التحكم بها بغرض تأديب السوريين على تصديهم لفرنسا في معركة ميسلون. كان هدف غورو تعزيز التنافس التجاري بين كل من حلب ودمشق آملا أن ينقلب إلى انقسامٍ سياسي على مبدأ فرق تسد الاستعماري، فقام بدعم الامتيازات الاقتصادية في حلب ليزعج الدمشقيين وأعلن دمشق عاصمة ليستفز الحلبيين، كان هدف غورو إغراء حلب بالامتيازات الاقتصادية لجعلها ترفض أي فكرةٍ للوحدة مع دمشق التي تم إفقارها نسبياً.
لكن محدودية الموارد في سوريا وترابط علاقات مدنها الاقتصادية وقتها جعلت الحكومة الفرنسية غير قادرة على استخدام فكرة الولايات المنفصلة لأنها هددت بحصول رد فعل عكسي في الولايات الفقيرة لتنادي بالوحدة مرةً أخرى، وقامت فرنسا حينها باقتراح قيام فيدرالية ولايات سوريا عام 1923 (بما فيها ولاية لبنان)، ليتم في النهاية ضم ولاياتٍ ثلاث، ولاية حلب ودمشق واللاذقية، تم تحديد حلب كعاصمةٍ في البداية، ثم ما لبثت أن أعيدت دمشق عاصمة؛ وكان رئيس الفيدرالية هو السيد صبحي بركات من مواليد مدينة حلب.
تم إيقاف العمل بالفيدرالية عام 1924 عندما قامت فرنسا، ولنفس أسباب التفرقة، بفصل حلب ودمشق في ولاية وجعل ولاية اللاذقية ولاية منفصلةً للعلويين بعد أن استشعر الفرنسيون خطر نزعة استقلالية بعد فترةٍ من اتحاد الولايات الثلاث.
وبعد هذا بقليل في عام 1925 قامت في السويداء جبل الدروز الثورة السورية الكبرى بقيادة سلطان باشا الأطرش؛ أرادت فرنسا الرد على السوريين فأوعزت إلى البرلمان الحلبي (وكان جلّ أعضائه من الموالين لها) بالانعقاد وإعلان الانفصال عن دمشق. ولكن الوطنيين في حلب بقيادة إبراهيم هنانو ثاروا بقوة وأحبطوا المشروع الفرنسي بعد أن أقاموا الاحتجاجات والتظاهرات وقاموا بقطع الطرق المؤدية إلى البرلمان يوم التصويت لمنع أعضائه من الوصول والتصويت على قرارهم المتوقع. وفي عام 1930 كانت حلب جزءاً من الجمهورية السورية، في عام 1936 تم توقيع معاهدة الاستقلال مع فرنسا وقيام حكومة الملك فيصل، ونالت حلب استقلالها كجزء من سوريا مجدداً في عام 1946 بعد أن قامت حكومة فيشي الفرنسية بنقض المعاهدة السابقة وإعادة احتلال سوريا عام 1941.

ما بعد الاستقلال
شاركت حلب بقوة في الحياة السياسية ما بعد الاستقلال، فكان أول رئيس حكومة وطنية من حلب وهو سعد الله الجابري، وبعد فترة تبعه ناظم القدسي و‌معروف الدواليبي، وكان محمد ناجي عطري أخر رئيس حكومة من مدينة حلب. والحلبي الوحيد الذي وصل إلى منصب رئيس الجمهورية هو أمين الحافظ بدعم من حزب البعث في 27 تموز / يوليو 1963. كما نشأت في حلب عدة حركات مثلاً حزب الشعب عام 1948 بقيادة رشدي الكيخيا و‌ناظم القدسي والذي اتخذ من مدينة حلب مقراً رئيساً له. كما تأسست فيها حركة الإخوان المسلمين في سوريا في عام 1937،
عانت المدينة من نزاع مسلح بين حركة الإخوان المسلمين والحكومة السورية بين عامي 1979 و‌1982، ويعتقد بأنها ثاني مدينة سقط فيها قتلى ضمن هذا النزاع بعد حماة.

الثورة السورية 2011-2024
شهدت المدينة عدداً من الأحداث بعدَ اندلاع حركة الاحتجاجات السورية 2011، فقد خرجت أول مظاهرة مناهضة لنظام الأسد وحزب البعث فيها في «جمعة العزة» بتاريخ 25 مارس 2011، ثمَّ أصبحت المظاهرات فيها حدثاً شبه أسبوعيّ أو حتى يومي، وأخذت بالتوسع شيئاً فشيئاً، ولو أنها لم تصل إلى قوة حركة الاحتجاجات في باقي مناطق سوريا. في تاريخ 30 يونيو 2011 أطلقت تنسيقيات الاحتجاجات عُنوان «بركان حلب» على يوم الخميس ذاك في مُحاولة لتأجيج المُظاهرات في المدينة أكثر، وأدى ذلك إلى خروج المظاهرات في أكثر من عشرة مناطق في المدينة وحُدوث محاولات للاعتصام في ساحة سعد الله الجابري الرئيسية بها، كما سقط قتيل خلال تلك المسيرات.

في 12 أغسطس 2011 خرجت مظاهرات ضخمة في المدينة هي الأولى من نوعها تحت شعار «جمعة لن نركع إلا لله»، وبسبب هذا أطلق الأمن النار على المُحتجين فسقطَ 3 قتلى في حيّ الصاخور، وأدى ذلك إلى تأجيج المظاهرات به أكثر وأكثر. وفي تاريخ 17 أغسطس 2011 تكرَّرت محاولات مُشابهة لتحريك المدينة بعدَ إطلاق شعار «أربعاء بدر حلب» على ذلك اليوم، وأدى ذلك إلى خروج مظاهرات ضخمة مشابهة للتي خرجت يوم بركان حلب ووصل خلالها الثوار إلى ساحة سعد الله الجابري في قلب المدينة،  وفي يوم الثلاثاء 6 سبتمبر خرجت مظاهرة كبيرة ضد النظام من الجامع الأموي وذلك في تشييع مفتي حلب إبراهيم السلقيني الذي كان قد توفي قبلها بيوم، ويَقول معارضون للنظام أن المخابرات السورية هي التي قتلته، وذلك إثر موقفه المؤيد للثورة السورية.
ومنذ بداية عام 2012 أصبحت المظاهرات السلمية ضد النظام حاشدة ويومية في حلب وتركزت في عدة أحياء مثل صلاح الدين والسكري وبستان القصر و‌الجامعة وغيرها، وكان يسقط عشرات القتلى من جمعة إلى جمعة في هذه المظاهرات، في 20 يوليو 2012 اندلعت اشتباكات مسلحة عنيفة داخل المدينة بين الجيش السوري الحر وقوات النظام في ما عرف لاحقا بمعركة حلب، ومن ثم بدأ الجيش السوري قصفه العنيف على أحياء في المدينة، وقد أدى هذا القصف لمقتل أكثر من 4000 شخص بعد أشهر من المعارك معظمهم مدنيون  كما ذكرت الأمم المتحدة ان أكثر من 200 الف شخص فروا من حلب منذ بدء المعارك فيها.
آخر تقييم لمنظمة الأمم المتحدة للتربية والعلم والثقافة (اليونسكو) لحجم الأضرار في المواقع الأثرية في مدينة حلب القديمة بين أن ثلث المدينة تم تدميره بالكامل  خلال سنوات الحرب في سوريا وأضافت أن 60% من مدينة حلب القديمة قد تضرر بشكل كبير و30% تم تدميره كليا.

معركة حلب 2024
في يوم 29 نوفمبر/تشرين الثاني، دخلت قوات المعارضة أحياء الحمدانية وحلب الجديدة في مدينة حلب بعد تنفيذ هجوم انتحاري مزدوج بسيارتين مفخختين. وفي النصف الثاني من اليوم، سيطرت قوات المعارضة على خمسة أحياء من مدينة حلب، وهي الحمدانية، حلب الجديدة، الجميلية، وصلاح الدين. ووردت تقارير عن اشتباكات في مناطق أخرى من المدينة، بما في ذلك وسطها. كما استولت قوات المعارضة على 20 بلدة وقرية أخرى، من بينها مدينة سراقب الاستراتيجية وسط انهيار خطوط دفاع القوات المسلحة السورية. وشملت القرى والبلدات التي استولت عليها قوات المعارضة: خان السبل، الطليحية، الترنبة، وجوباس في ريف إدلب، وخان طومان، شغيدلة، خَلْصَة، الحاضر، القراصي، بَرْنة، العيس، تلحدية، زيتان، المنصورة، والبوابية في ريف حلب.
بحلول نهاية يوم 29 نوفمبر/تشرين الثاني 2024، سيطرت قوات المعارضة على أجزاء من أحياء السكري، الفرقان، الأعظمية، وسيف الدولة في مدينة حلب، وسيطرت على الساحة الرئيسية في وسط المدينة.
في الساعات الأولى من يوم 30 نوفمبر/تشرين الثاني 2024، استولت قوات المعارضة على قلعة حلب ومقر المحافظ في المدينة، وأعلنت السيطرة على "أكثر من نصف مدينة حلب". بحلول الصباح، سيطرت قوات المعارضة على معظم مدينة حلب، مما أجبر القوات المسلحة السورية على الانسحاب نحو السفيرة.

المناخ
يمكن اعتبار المناخ في حلب مناخاً شبه قاري، نظراً لأن سلسلة الجبال المحاذية للبحر الأبيض المتوسط الشاملة جبال اللاذقية وجبال الأمانوس تقوم بحجب تأثيرات المناخ المتوسطي على المدينة. معدل درجات الحرارة يتراوح بين 18-20 درجة مئوية، ومتوسط هطول الأمطار حوالي 385 ملم. 80% من الأمطار تحصل بين شهري تشرين الأول و‌آذار. من النادر تساقط الثلوج وإن كانت المدينة تشهدها كل بضع سنوات. ومتوسط درجة الرطوبة حوالي 58%.

الديموغرافيا السكانية
تعداد السكان تاريخياً
حسب المؤرخ شيخ كامل الغزي، فإن تعداد حلب بلغ حوالي 400,000 نسمة قبل زلزلة حلب الكبرى. والذي تبعه انتشار موجة من الطاعون والكوليرا في أعوام 1823 و1827. أدت هذه الكوارث إلى انخفاض عدد السكان بشكل حاد ليصل 110,000 في نهايات القرن التاسع عشر  في عام 1901، بلغ التعداد الكلي لمدينة حلب 108,143 نسمة شكل المسلمون منهم 76,329 نسمة بنسبة (70.58%)، بينما شكل المسيحيون 24,508 نسمة (22.66%)، واليهود نسبة 7,306 (6.76%).

النازحون الأرمن لمدينة حلب
إلا أن تعداد سكان المدينة عاد ليزداد بعد استقبالها للنازحين الأرمن في بدايات القرن العشرين (1915–1922). وصل التعداد السكاني للمدينة عام 1922 إلى 156,748 شكل المسلمون منهم 97,600 (62.26%)، المسيحيون 22,117 (14.11%)، اليهود 6,580 (4.20%)، الأرمن 20,007 (12.76%)، وجنسيات أخرى 7,792 (4.97%).جاءت الموجة الثانية للنازحين الأرمن مع انسحاب القوات الفرنسية من كيليكية عام 1923.، وذلك بعد وصول أكثر من 40,000 ألف لاجئ أرمني بين 1923-1925، ووصل التعداد الكلي للمدينة إلى 210,000 نسمة مع نهاية عام 1925 وشكل الأرمن ربع السكان.
وفقاً للمعطيات التاريخية المقدمة من قبل شيخ كامل الغزي، فإن الغالبية من مسيحيي المدينة كانوا من الكاثوليك حتى نهايات فترة الحكم العثماني. إن ازدياد أعداد المسيحيين الأورثودوكس ارتبطت بقدوم النازحين الأرمن من أرمينيا ومرتفعات تركيا الجنوبية، ومن الناحية الأخرى لتدفق أعداد من النازحين الأورثودوكس عند تهجيرهم من لواء الآسكندرونة عندما تم إلحاق سنجق الإسكندرونة عام 1939 بتركيا.في عام 1944، كان تعداد السكان حوالي 325,000، شكل المسيحيون منهم حوالي 112,110 (34.5%) نصفهم من الأرمن 60,200.
كانت مدينة حلب تضم تعدادا هاما من اليهود أيضاً في العصور القديمة. وبها معبد يهودي بني في القرن الخامس الميلادي. كانت أحياء اليهود التقليدية تشمل أحياء الجميلية، باب النصر، والمناطق المجاورة للمعبد.
ثم بدأت موجات هجرة اليهود نحو فلسطين تظهر بعد إعلان قيام دولة إسرائيل من طرف واحد من قبل المهاجرين اليهود الأوروبيين ومع تواطؤ كل من بريطانيا والولايات المتحدة الأمريكية.
عام 1968، كان لا يزال يقطن مدينة حلب أكثر من 700 يهودي على الأقل 
حاولت الحكومة السورية بداية الحفاظ على الرعايا اليهود؛ فمثلاً وحتى يومنا هذا، ظلت أملاك اليهود غير مسكونة حتى بعد هجرتهم، إذ تركت الحكومة السورية حجوزاتها على المساكن شريطة أن لا يهاجر الرعايا اليهود السوريون إلى الأراضي التي احتلها الكيان الإسرائيلي. إلا أن معظم اليهود قد هاجروا بدايةً إلى الولايات المتحدة الأمريكية، ليشكلوا جالية معتبرة في بروكلين - نيويورك بشكل أساسي، أما البقية فقد غادروها في النهاية وتوجهوا إلى إسرائيل.

الوضع الديموغرافي الحالي وتناغم السكان
المدينة حالياً هي الأكثر كثافةً سكانياً في القطر، مع تعداد وصل حتى 2,181,061 نسمة وفق أرقام مسح عام 2004. وفي أواخر العام 2005 أعلن مجلس المدينة وصول التعداد إلى 2,301,570 مليون نسمة.
غالبية سكان حلب هم العرب وأقلية من الأكراد و‌الأرمن والشركس والتركمان وغيرهم، وتتجانس فيها الإثنيات والأديان منذ القدم لتتمتع المدينة بالتنوع والمشاركة والتعاون بين كافة الأعراق والطوائف من السكان بشكل رائع وجميل يعتبر مضرباً للمثل في الشرق الأوسط.
تقريبا 85% من سكان حلب هم من المسلمين السنة العرب، وسكان حلب من الديانة المسيحية هم التجمع الثاني من حيث الحجم بعد مدينة بيروت (بين 10% و15%) في المنطقة، وتحتضن بين جنباتها حوالي 45 كنيسة أو مبنى كنسي تنتمي للطوائف المتنوعة فهناك السريان واللاتين والموارنة والكاثوليك والأرثوذكس والكلدانيين يتعايشون جميعاً في جو من الود والإخاء. كانت حلب أيضًا موطنًا لإحدى أغنى المجتمعات المسيحية الشرقية وأكثرها تنوعًا في الشرق، تاريخياً قطن المسيحيون في أحياء معروفة مثل الجديدة والعزيزية والسليمانية، محطة بغداد، العروبة والميدان. وإن بدؤوا بالانتشار خارج هذه الأحياء التقليدية مع ازدياد عدد السكان وظهور الأحياء السكنية الحديثة. قبل الحرب الأهلية السورية كانت مدينة حلب ثالث مدينة في الشرق الأوسط بعد القاهرة وبيروت من حيث عدد المسيحيين،  حيث ضمت المدينة قبل الحرب الأهلية السورية بين 160,000 إلى 250,000 مسيحي.
يتميز أهل حلب بلهجتهم المحلية المميزة والتي تستعير كثيراً من الكلمات من اللغة التركية نظراً لقرب المسافة الجغرافية.

الديانة
الإسلام
أكثر من 80% من سكان حلب هم من المسلمين السُنّة، وهم أساساً من العرب، ويليهم كل من التركمان والأكراد. تشمل الجماعات الإسلامية الأخرى أعدادًا صغيرة من الشركس والشيشانيين والألبان والبوشناق واليونانيين والبلغار.
المناطق الشمالية الغربية من حلب، ولا سيما حي الشيخ مقصود، يقطنها الأكراد بشكل رئيسي. منذ بداية الحرب الأهلية السورية، تتم حماية هذه المناطق من حلب بواسطة الميليشيات الكردية، وبالتالي فهي أكثر المناطق أمانًا بالمقارنة مع باقي المناطق في حلب. لم تتحدَّ قوات الحكومة المركزية أو جيوش المتمردين الجيش الكردي ولم تتعد على المناطق الكردية. العديد من غير الأكراد في حلب فروا إلى الأحياء الخاضعة للسيطرة الكردية. وشكلّ الأكراد حوالي 7% إلى 10% من سكان المدينة قبل الحرب.

المسيحية
كانت حلب أيضًا موطنًا لإحدى أغنى المجتمعات المسيحية الشرقية وأكثرها تنوعًا في الشرق. وتاريخياً خصوصًا خلال الحكم العثماني عمل المسيحيون في التجارة وأقاموا في أحياء خاصة فيهم أبرزها الجديّدة، وشيّدت في الحي ذاته بيوت فخمة تدل على ثراء ورفاهية أصحابها، فضلًا عن مختلف المرافق التي تتيح لهذا الحيّ أن يعيش حياته المستقلة منها حمامات عامة مثل حمام برهم. في تلك الحقبة كان مسيحيو حلب أكثر ثراءً من المسلمين. كانت الطوائف الأرثوذكسية وغيرها من الطوائف المسيحية تزداد ثروة وثقافة ونفوذًا طوال القرن الثامن عشر. فالحماية الأجنبية لم تمنحها امتيازات سياسية فحسب، بل وفرت لأبنائها أيضًا، وهم العاملون بالتجارة مع أوروبا في ذلك الحين، منافع تجارية ومالية. وقد اغتنى، بنوع خاص، اليونانيون والأرمن والمسيحيون السوريون الناطقون بالضاد، فارتفع مع هذا الغنى مستواهم الثقافي واشتد شعورهم الطائفي. خلال القرن الثامن عشر ازدهرت الحياة الثقافية وقام في حلب نخبة من الأدباء والمفكّرين المسيحيين كان لهم دور في النهضة العربية الحديثة. وقام المسيحيون بدور كبير في عهد الانتداب وكانوا العمود الفقري لأهم الدوائر والمؤسسات ولمعوا في المهن الحرّة كالطب والمحاماة والهندسة كما تابعوا نشاطهم التجاري التقليدي متأقلمين مع الأوضاع الجديدة. وظلّت الطبقة العاملة تتقن المهن التقليدية كالبناء، والنسيج وعملوا على إدخال التصنيع الحديث. ونبغ خاصة الأرمن في الصناعات الميكانيكية ومن «مهاجرين» أصبحوا أرباب عمل ونخبة ثريّة. وساهم المسيحيون في الحياة السياسية كنوّاب ووزراء وعملوا مع إخوانهم المسلمين للحصول على الاستقلال التام. كانت الغالبية من مسيحيي المدينة من الكاثوليك حتى نهايات فترة الحكم العثماني، وقد ارتبط ازدياد أعداد المسيحيين الأرثوذكس المشرقيين بقدوم النازحين الأرمن والسريان من قيليقية وطور عبدين في تركيا هربًا من الإبادة الجماعية الأرمنية والسريانية، ومن الناحية الأخرى لتدفق أعداد من النازحين الأرثوذكس العرب (روم أنطاكيون) عند تهجيرهم من لواء الاسكندرون عندما تم إلحاق سنجق الإسكندرونة عام 1939 بتركيا. في عام 1944، كان تعداد السكان حوالي 325,000 نسمة وشكّل المسيحيون حوالي 112,110 (34.5%) وكان نصفهم من الأرمن أي 60,200 نسمة.
قبل الحرب الأهلية السورية كانت مدينة حلب ثالث مدينة في الشرق الأوسط بعد القاهرة وبيروت من حيث عدد المسيحيين،  حيث ضمت المدينة قبل الحرب الأهلية السورية بين 160,000 إلى 250,000 مسيحي. مع تواجد للعديد من الطوائف المسيحية الشرقية، وخاصةً من الأرمن والسريان. تاريخياً كانت المدينة المركز الرئيسي للمبشرين الكاثوليك الفرنسيين في سوريا. وكان عدد سكان حلب المسيحيين أكثر بقليل من 250,000 نسمة قبل الحرب الأهلية السورية، وهو ما يمثل حوالي 12% من إجمالي سكان المدينة. ومع ذلك، نتيجة للحرب الأهلية السورية، انخفض عدد السكان المسيحيين في المدينة إلى أقل من 100,000 اعتبارًا من بداية عام 2017، وكان منهم حوالي 30% من الإثنية الأرمنية. ويتحدث عدد كبير من السريان في حلب اللغة السريانية، وينحدرون من مدينة أورفة في تركيا، ويتبعون في الغالب الكنيسة السريانية الأرثوذكسية والكنيسة السريانية الكاثوليكية. ومع ذلك، هناك وجود كبير لأتباع بطريركية أنطاكية وسائر المشرق للروم الأرثوذكس. هناك أيضاً عدد كبير من المسيحيين الكاثوليك الشرقيين في المدينة بما في ذلك الروم الملكيين والموارنة والكلدان وأتباع الطقوس اللاتينية. المسيحيون البروتستانت من مختلف الطوائف هم أقلية في المدينة.
تتمتع العديد من أحياء المدينة بأغلبية مسيحية وأرمنية، مثل الحي المسيحي القديم في الجديدة. وتعمل حوالي 50 كنيسة في المدينة والتي تديرها مختلف الطوائف المسيحية. ومع ذلك، وفقًا لنائب رئيس لجنة اليونسكو التابعة للاتحاد الروسي ألكساندر دزاسوخوف، عانت حوالي 20 كنيسة من الدمار الشديد خلال المعارك في حلب،  وأبرزها الوطنية الكنيسة الإنجيلية، وكذلك الكنائس التاريخية المحيطة بحي الجديدة. وفي 25 ديسمبر من عام 2016، بعد انتصار الحكومة، تم الاحتفال بعيد الميلاد علانية في حلب لأول مرة منذ أربع سنوات.

اليهودية
كانت المدينة موطناً لعدد كبير من السكان اليهود منذ العصور القديمة. وتم بناء الكنيس العظيم في القرن الخامس، وضم الكنيس مخطوطة حلب. عُرف يهود حلب بالتزامهم الديني والقيادة الحاخامية والليتورجية، والتي تكونت من البيزمونيم والبقشوت. بعد ظهور محاكم التفتيش الإسبانية، استقبلت مدينة حلب العديد من المهاجرين اليهود السفارديم، الذين انضموا في النهاية إلى الجالية اليهودية المحلية في حلب. كانت هناك علاقات سلمية بين اليهود والسكان المحيطين بهم. في أوائل القرن العشرين، كان يهود المدينة يعيشون بشكل رئيسي في حي الجميلية وباب الفرج والأحياء المحيطة بالكنيس الكبير. أدت الاضطرابات في فلسطين في السنوات التي سبقت قيام دولة إسرائيل في عام 1948 إلى تزايد العداء لليهود الذين يعيشون في البلدان العربية، وبلغت ذروتها في الهجرة اليهودية من الأراضي العربية. هاجم حشد عربي الحي اليهودي في ديسمبر من عام 1947 عقب قرار الأمم المتحدة بتقسيم فلسطين. وتعرضت المنازل والمدارس والمتاجر لأضرار بالغة. بعد فترة وجيزة، هاجر العديد من يهود المدينة البالغ تعدادهم ستة آلاف. وفي عام 1968 كان هناك ما يقرب من 700 يهودي لا يزالون في حلب.
لم يتم بيع المنازل والممتلكات الأخرى للعائلات اليهودية بعد الهجرة، ولا تزال غير مأهولة تحت حماية الحكومة السورية. معظم هذه العقارات موجودة في مناطق الجميلية وباب الفرج والأحياء المحيطة بالكنيس المركزي في حلب. في عام 1992، رفعت الحكومة السورية حظر السفر على 4,500 مواطن يهودي. وسافر معظمهم إلى الولايات المتحدة، حيث يعيش عدد كبير من اليهود السوريين حاليًا في بروكلين في نيويورك. تم إجلاء آخر يهود حلب المُتبقين في المدينة، من أفراد عائلة الحلبي، في أكتوبر عام 2016 من قبل الجيش السوري الحر، وتعيش العائلة الآن في إسرائيل.

الطراز المعماري
تتميز مدينة حلب بتعدد الطرز المعمارية الموجودة فيها، إذ تجمع أنماطاً معماريةً سلجوقية وبيزنطيةً إضافةً للطرز المملوكية والعثمانية، ممن تعاقبوا عليها على مر السنين.
يوجد في المدينة العديد من المباني القديمة العائدة للقرنين الثالث والرابع عشر ميلادي، مثل الخانات والمدارس الدينية والحمامات، إضافةً للمباني الدينية كالجوامع والكنائس.
وظهرت في حلب في القرنين السادس والسابع عشر بيوت مملوكة للعديد من العائلات الحلبية الثرية تتميز بواجهاتها الحجرية الغاية في الجمال، في القرن ال 19 ومطلع القرن العشرين كان طراز العمارة الباروكية هو السائد، ومثاله بناء فيلا روز الشهير في منطقة العزيزية. بينما يجمع حي الشهباء الجديدة الراقي العديد من الطرز المعمارية الشرقية، والكلاسيكية الغربية وحتى الصينية
وذلك بفضل مهارة الصناع الحلبيين في قد الصخور، خصوصاً من الحجر الأبيض الذي تشتهر به مدينة حلب.

معالم المدينة القديمة
يوجد نسبياً انقسام واضح بين حدود المدينة القديمة والمدينة الحديثة في حلب. الجزء القديم موجودٌ ضمن جدار المدينة القديم الذي يشكل دائرةً نصف قطرها 5 كيلومترات، وله 9 بوابات. (باستثناء حي الجديدة الذي بني بعد الغزوات المغولية في القرن الخامس عشر عل الرغم أنه يعد جزءاً من المدينة القديمة) في مركز المدينة القديمة تقع قلعة حلب الضخمة على تلة مرتفعة، مشرفة بذلك على كافة أحياء المدينة القديمة. ويتوسطها مدرجٌ واسع هو مدرج القلعة الذي تقام فيه العديد من الحفلات.

أبواب حلب القديمة
أبواب حلب جزءٌ أساسي ومهم من السور، ومن ذاكرة المدينة، فقد كانت هذه الأبواب منفذ أهل حلب عبر السور المنيع الذي رد عنهم هجمات الغزاة على مر العصور، حتى أنه يمكن القول أن كل ضربة سيف أو سقطة رمح أو طلقة منجنيق، لابد أنها وقد تركت أثراً أو حفرة أو ندبة على هذه الأبواب. عدد هذه الأبواب تسعة، اندثر منها أربعة وحوفظ على خمسة منها في المدينة القديمة:

باب الحديد
باب أنطاكية
باب النصر
باب قنسرين
باب الفرج
باب المقام
باب الجنان أو باب جنين في اللهجة الحلبية.
باب الأحمر
باب النيرب

الحفاظ على المدينة القديمة
باعتبارها مدينةً ذات طرازٍ معماري قديم تميزه الأسواق المسقوفة والخانات والحمامات والمدارس، إضافةً للمساجد والكنائس، فإن المدينة كنزُ أثري بحاجة للعناية والصيانة المستمرة. تمت إعادة تخطيط المدينة بشكل واضح بعد انتهاء الحرب العالمية الثانية. وفي عام 1954 اعتمد مخطط معماري من قبل المعماري الفرنسي أندريه جوتون، والذي اقترح شق عددٍ من الجادات العريضة عبر المدينة لتتناسب مع دخول السيارات. بين أعوام 1954-1983 تم هدم العديد من الأحياء القديمة تحت هذه الذريعة بغرض التوسع، خصوصاً في المناطق الشمالية مثل باب الفرج وباب جنين لكن الوعي المتزايد بأهمية هذه المباني أدى في النهاية لإلغاء مخطط جوتون عام 1979 وليتم الاستعاضة عنه بتخطيط لمهندس المدن السويسري ستيفانو بيانكو، والذي أطلق فكرة المحافظة على النسيج العمراني القديم لحلب القديمة. الأمر الذي مهد الطريق لليونسكو لتضم مدينة حلب القديمة إلى التراث العالمي عام 1986.
قام العديد من المعاهد العالمية بالتضافر مع الجهات المحلية وجمعية آثار حلب، لإعادة تأهيل المدينة القديمة بإضافة نمط حياة عصري إليها مع المحافظة على الطابع التراثي.
تقوم هنالك شراكة بين مؤسسة ألمانيا التقنية GTZ و‌مؤسسة الآغا خان ضمن برنامج الآغا خان لحماية المدن القديمة ساهمت في كثير من الأعمال للحفاظ وتأهيل المدينة القديمة

الأسواق والخانات في مدينة حلب
مدينة حلب مدينةُ تجارية بامتياز، فقد جذب موقع المدينة الاستراتيجي على طريق الحرير العديد من السكان من كافة الأعراق والمعتقدات ليقطنوا فيها ويستفيدوا من وقوعها بين الصين وبلاد الرافدين من الشرق وأوروبا من الغرب، ومصر في الجنوب. تحتوي حلب على أكبر سوقٍ شرقيٍ مسقوفٍ في العالم، بمساحةٍ كلية تصل حتى 16 هيكتاراً وبطولٍ يصل حتى 16 كيلومتراً
تعتبر منطقة المدينة المنطقة التجارية النشطة للبضاعات المستوردة، مثل الحرير القادم من إيران، التوابل والبهارات القادمة من الهند. والقهوة والأقمشة القادمة من دمشق. تعتبر المدينة أيضاً موطن الصناعات المحلية كالقطن، المنتجات الزراعية، وصابون الغار الذي تشتهر به مدينة حلب. شيدت معظم أجزاء السوق في القرن الرابع عشر وسميت حسب أسماء الحرف والمهن المزاولة فيها، مثل سوق الصوف، سوق الصاغة، وقس على ذلك.. بالإضافة للتجارة، فإن السوق منح للتجار ولبضائعهم خانات متواجدة حول الأسواق. أخذت الخانات أيضاً أسماءها عن مواقعها وحرفة السوق الواقع فيه، وتتميز هذه الخانات بواجهاتها الجميلة المحصنة بالأبواب الخشبية المتينة.

الأسواقُ والخاناتُ التاريخية
الأسواق التاريخية في المدينة قديمة كثيرة أهمها:

سوق خان الحرير، بني في النصف الثاني من القرن السادس عشر، وعرف بمحلاته ال 43 المتخصصة في تجارة الأقمشة، وقد كان مقراً للقنصلية الإيرانية حتى عام 1919.
خان الشونة، بني في العام 1546. ويعتبر حالياً مركزاً للصناعات الحرفية اليدوية الحلبية.
سوق العطارين، تقليدياً، كان هذا السوق سوق بيع التوابل والأعشاب في حلب، إلا أنه حالياً مركز لبيع المنسوجات والأقمشة بمحلاته ال 82.
سوق الياسمين
سوق العتمة
خان الجمرك، مركز تسوق للألبسة والأقمشة بمحلاته ال 55، بني عام 1574، ويعتبر أكبر خانٍ في حلب القديمة.
خان الوزير، بني عام 1682، ويعتبر سوق المنتوجات القطنية الأساسي في مدينة حلب.
خان البنادقة
خان خيري بيك
خان الشونة، سوق المهن اليدوية.
خان القاضي، بني في عام 1490، أحد أقدم الخانات في حلب.
خان البرغل، بني في عام 1472، وقد كان مقر القنصلية البريطانية في حلب حتى بدايات القرن العشرين.
خان الصابون، أو سوق الصابون، بني في بدايات القرن السادس عشر.
سوق النحاسين، بني في عام 1539، وشغلته القنصلية البلغارية في القرن السادس عشر. بينما يعتبر حالياً مركز لصناعة وبيع الأحذية العصرية مع 84 محلاً متخصصاً في بيعها.
سوق الزرب، المعروف قديماً بسوق الضرب، حيث كانت العملة تضرب في الفترة المملوكية. حالياً فإن السوق يتضمن 71 دكاناً، تقوم معظمها بالمتاجرة في الأقمشة والملبوسات وخصوصاً الملابس التقليدية.
سوق البهرمية، أسفل جامع البهرمية وتضم 52 محلاً لبيع المنتجات الغذائية.
سوق الحدادين، تحتوي على 37 دكاناً وكانت مقر الحدادة تقليدياً.
سوق العتيق، أو خان العتيق، متخصصة في تجارة الجلود والمدبوغات وتحتوي 48 محلاً.
سوق الصياغ، مركز بيع المجوهرات الأساسي في حلب وتضم 99 معرض مجوهرات.
سوق النسوان، للمستلزمات النسائية من الملابس وأثياب الزفاف وعدة زينة العروس.
السويقة أو سويقة علي، تعني كلمة سويقة تصغيراً لسوق، لكنها نسبياً سوق كبير يحتوي مجموعةً من الخانات والمتاجر المتخصصة بشكل أساسي في مستلزمات المطابخ المنزلية.
خان الهوكيدون، وهي كلمة أرمنية تعني «منزل الروح»، وترمز للخان الذي بني في تلك المنطقة كنزُلٍ للحجاج الأرمن أثناء طريقهم إلى القدس.
يعود الجزء القديم من خان الهوكيدون إلى أواخر القرن الخامس عشر وبدايات القرن السادس عشر، بينما تعود عمارة الجزء الحديث إلى القرن السابع عشر. تحول حالياً إلى سوقٍ كبير متخصصة في بيع الملابس الداخلية.

الصليبة، هي مركز تجاري في وسط الكنائس المسيحية في حي الجديدة
سوق الصوف، للمنتجات الصوفية.
بوابة القصب، مركز للصناعات الخشبية وكراسي الخيزران التقليدية الشهيرة.

المباني الأثرية
تتضمن أهم المباني الأثرية في المدينة القديمة:

القلعة قلعة حلب، جيدة التحصين والمبنية على تل اصطناعي مردوم جزئياً يرتفع حوالي 50 متراً عن مستوى المدينة، يعود تاريخ القلعة إلى الألف الأولى قبل الميلاد. العديد من أجزائها الحالية تعود للقرن الثالث عشر. وقد تأثرت هذه القلعة الصامدة بتعاقب الغزاة والكوارث الطبيعة خصوصاً زلزال عام 1822.
المدرسة الحلاوية، بنيت في العام 1124 في الموقع الأصلي لكنسية سانت.هيلين، والتي بنيت كمعبد في روما القديمة من قبل قسطنطين الكبير. وفي فترة الحروب الصليبية وعندما تمت محاصرة المدينة، فإن قاضي حلب أصدر قراراً بتحويلها إلى جامع، وفي نهاية القرن الثاني عشر، حولها نور الدين زنكي إلى مدرسة، وتتميز بوجود محراب جميل مصنوع في القرن الرابع عشر.
المكتبة العجمية، وهو قصرٌ بني في القرن الثاني عشر بالقرب من القلعة من قبل الأمير مجد الدين بن الداي من الأسرة الزنكية، تم تجديده في القرن 15. وأصبح مقراً لمتحف التراث الشعبي بين عامي 1967 - 1975.
المدرسة المقدمية، وهي إحدى أقدم المدارس الدينية في المدينة وبنيت عام 1168، مشهورة بنقوش الآرابسك الجميلة.
المدرسة الظاهرية، بنيت عام 1217 جنوب باب المقام، من قبل السلطان الظاهر غازي،
مدرسة الفردوس، والتي يعتبرها البعض أجمل مسجدٍ في حلب القديمة. بنيت من قبل أرملة الظاهر غازي بين 1234-1237، وبعد ذلك أعيد بناؤها في الفترة الأيوبية أيام الحاكم الناصر يوسف، تتميز ببهوٍ جميل تتوسطه نافورة وتحيط بها الأقواس من مختلف الجهات، وتتميز بوجود محراب جميل مزين بنقوش الآرابسك.
المدرسة السلطانية، بدأ بناؤها في عهد السلطان الظاهر غازي وتم بناؤها بين 1223-1225 من قبل ابنه مالك العزيز محمد، أكثر ما يميز بناءها هو محراب قاعة الصلاة.
خان الفرافرة، بني عام 1237 وغدا صومعة للمتصوفة في القرن الثالث عشر.
بيمارستان آرغون الكاملي بدأ العمل عام 1354 وحتى بدايات القرن العشرين.
دار رجب باشا، وهو منزلُ ضخم بني في القرن 16 قرب جادة الخندق، وقد تم تجديده ليشغله حالياً المركز الثقافي لمدينة حلب. الملحقة به قاعة مسرح كبيرة.
بيت جنبلاط منزلُ قديم بني في نهايات القرن 16 من قبل حاكم حلب الكردي حسين باشا جنبلاط
المدرسة العثمانية وهي مركز تعليمي إسلامي توجد شمال باب النصر، وتم بناؤها تحت أمر الباشا العثماني الدراقي عام 1730.
بيت مرعش، وهو منزل حلبي تقليدي في حي الفرافرة، بني في نهايات القرن الثامن عشر من قبل عائلة مرعش.
ساعة باب الفرج، بنيت في العام 1898- 1899 من قبل المعمار الأسترالي شارتييه 
دار الكتب الوطنية، بنيت خلال الثلاثينيات 1930 وافتتحت عام 1945.، ضمن حي الجديدة، تتجمع متلاصقةً مع العديد من المباني الأثرية:
بيت وكيل، منزل حلبي بني عام 1603، بديكوراتٍ خشبية مميزة، أحد ديكوراته هذه تم جلبها إلى برلين لتعرض في متحف برغامون (بالألمانية: Pergamonmuseum) ببرلين تحت اسم: الغرفة الحلبية.
بيت الأجقباش بني عام 1757، وأصبح مقراً لمتحف الفنون الشعبية منذ عام 1975.
بيت غزالة، مبنىً قديم من القرن 17 يتميز بديكوراته الفخمة، والتي أنجزت من قبل النحات الأرمني قاشقادر بالي عام 1691. خلال القرن العشرين تم استعماله كمدرسة ابتدائيةٍ أرمنية، وحالياً يستخدم بعد التجديد كمتحف ذاكرة مدينة حلب.
دار زمريا، بنيت في نهاية القرن السابع عشر من قبل عائلة زمريا، وتم تحويله إلى فندق حالياً.
دار باسيل، منزل حلبي من بدايات القرن 18، تم تحويله لمدرسة إدارة أعمال منذ عام 2001.
بيت دلال، بنيت عام 1826، وكانت عبارةً عن كنيسة وصومعة، إلى أن تم تحويلها إلى فندق.

الأماكن الدينية
الجامع الأموي الكبير، بني عام 715 من قبل الخليفة الأموي الوليد بن عبد الملك، وتم إنهاؤه على الأرجح في عهد خليفته سليمان بن عبد الملك. يتضمن الجامع مزاراً للنبي زكريا، والد يوحنا المعمدان. البناء بطرازه الحالي يعود لنور الدين زنكي وبدأ تشييده عام 1158. لكنه قد تأذى بشدة أثناء الغزو المغولي عام 1260، وتمت إعادة بنائه مجدداً، ترتفع منارته بخمسة وأربعين مترا وتعتبر شاهداً على العمارة السورية في العصور الإسلامية  وقد تم تشييد هذه المئذنة عام 1090-1092 على يد السلطان السلجوقي الأول قسطش، ولها أربع واجهات تتميز كلُ منها بشكلٍ مختلف. دمرت مئذنة الجامع الكبير في 24/04/2013.
جامع الأطروش، بني عام 1403 على الطراز المملوكي، وله مدخل جميل وواجهة مشغولة بعناية.
جامع العادلية، بني عام 1557  من قبل المتصرف العثماني في حلب محمد باشا، يتميز ببهوٍ للصلاة تظلله الأقواس من الجوانب، ومحراب جميل.
جامع الطغاشي، بني خلال القرن 14 وتم ترميمه عام 1537، وله واجهة كبيرة مزدانة بالأعمدة الصغيرة.
جامع الصاحبية، بني عام 1930 قرب خان الوزير.
جامع القيقان (جمع غراب)، ويحتوي على عمودين أثريين من البازلت في مدخله، كما يضم حجراً منقوشاً عليه باللغة الحثية القديمة.
جامع الصفاقية، أنشئ عام 1425، ويشتهر بمئذنته المثمنة المزخرفة بإتقان.
جامع السفاحية، بناه القاضي أحمد بن صالح بن أحمد السفاح.
جامع النقطة، يعتقد بانه يحوي حجراً قيل بأنه معلم بنقطة دم سقطت من الحسن بن علي، يعتقد بأن موقع هذا الجامع كان عبارة عن صومعة اعتكاف دينية تم تحويلها إلى مسجد عام 944.
جامع التوتة، وهو جامع من العصر الأيوبي، يحتوي على زخارف وخطوط كوفية تعود للقرن الثاني عشر. وتوجد فيه قوسٌ رومانية قديمة تدل على أنه موقعه كان بدايةً لطريق رومانية تسمى دوقمانوس (باللاتينية: decumanus) في اتجاه شرق-غرب وفق التخطيط الروماني للمدن القديمة.
جامع الخسروية، أتم بناؤه عام 1547، وصمم من قبل المعمار العثماني الأرمني الأصل الشهير المعمار سنان
المسجد الكبير، من المعالم التاريخية والدينية الهامة في قلعة حلب ويقع بجوار سور القلعة الشمالي
كنيسة الأربعين شهيد، أيضاً كنيسة أرمنية من القرن الخامس عشر تتواجد في حي الجديدة.
كنيسة الشيباني، في حي الجلوم، بنيت في القرن الثاني عشر، تضم كنيسةً ومدرسة يوم أحدٍ لبعثة ماري الرسولية، وحالياً تستخدم كمركزٍ ثقافي.
كنيسة الأرمن الأرثوذكس، بنيت عام 1429 وكان اسمها القديم كنيسة الأم المقدسة. تحولت لاحقًا إلى متحف عُرف بـمتحف زآرهيان.
كنيسة مار آسيا الحكيم، كنيسة سريانية كاثوليكية يُنيت في القرن الخامس عشر في حيّ الجديدة.
كاتدرائية القديس الياس التي تتبع الطائفة المارونية.
كنيسة السيدة العذراء، تتبع كنيسة الروم الملكيين الكاثوليك.
كما يوجد في حلب معبد يهودي يسمى معبد البنداره، تم إكماله في القرن التاسع، وتم ترميمه عدة مرات أبرزها عام 1428، وهو متواجد حتى يومنا هذا.

التعليم
نظراً لموقعها كمركزٍ اقتصادي أول، فلا بد للمدينة أن تحتوي العديد من المؤسسات التعليمية، على مستوى التعليم الأساسي والثانوي. فتوجد في المدينة عشرات المدارسُ الحكومية التي تقدم خدمة التعليم الإلزامي والثانوي بالإضافة لعدد من المدارس الخاصة، وفيها أيضاً مدرستان دوليتان هما المدرسة الدولية في حلب والثانوية الفرنسية في حلب Lycée Français d'Alep.
لعل أشهر مدرسة في مدينة حلب هي ثانوية المأمون العريقة المنشأة بأمر الوالي العثماني جميل حسن باشا عام 1892، وكانت حينها تدعى بالمكتب الإعدادي.

في عام/1992/ كان الاحتفال الرسمي بمناسبة إحياء الذكرى المئوية لهذه الثانوية العريقة، وقد كلِّلَ بإصدار الكتاب المئوي التذكاري. وهو كتاب تضمن كلماتِ المهرجانِ والمسؤولين وانطباعاتٍ وذكرياتِ المدرسين والمدراءِ والطلابِ السابقين. وحفل بصور تذكاريةٍ جميلة. وقصائدَ تتغنَّى بالمأمون وفضلِها. ويضافُ إلى الكتابين الهامين المذكورين عدّة أعداد من مجلة المأمون وهي أعداد غنية صدرت في عام/ 1967 – 1968/.
على مستوى التعليم العالي فالمعلم الهام هو جامعة حلب الحكومية، ويتجاوز عدد طلاب جامعة حلب 60 ألفاً وتضم 18 كلية و8 معاهد تقنية. ومعاهداً للفنون الجميلة التابعة لوزارة التعليم العالي.
توجد أيضاً في المدينة فروعُ لجامعاتٍ غير حكومية مثل جامعة قرطبة الخاصة و‌جامعة الخليج الخاصة للإدارة والهندسة المعلوماتية، وتوجد بالقرب منها أيضاً جامعة إيبلا الخاصة على حدود محافظة إدلب. وتجتذب هذه المعاهد التدريسية العديد من الطلاب من سوريا والدول المجاورة.
ويوجد في حلب أحد أكثر المعاهد العسكرية تقدماً على مستوى الشرق الأوسط: أكاديمية الأسد للهندسة العسكرية

الفنون والثقافة
حلب مدينة الفن والفنون ولا يمكن ذكر الفن في الوطن العربي دون ذكر حلب، فقد كان سيف الدولة يهتم بالعلوم، وظهر في عصره عدد من الأطباء المشهورين، مثل عيسى الرَّفي المعروف بالتفليسي، وأبو الحسين بن كشكرايا.
ومن أبرز الفلكيين والرياضيين الذين ظهروا في عصر الحمدانيين في بلاد الشام أبو القاسم الرقي و‌المجتبى الإنطاكي و‌ديونيسيوس وقيس الماروني، كما عُني الحمدانيون بالعلوم العقلية كالفلسفة والمنطق، فلَمع نجم عدد كبير من الفلاسفة والمفكرين الإسلاميين في بلاط الحمدانيين، مثل: الفارابي، و‌ابن سينا. أما في مجال العلوم العربية، فقد ظهر عدد من علماء اللغة المعروفين، مثل ابن خالويه، و‌أبو الفتح بن جني، وأبو علي الحسين بن أحمد الفارسي، و«عبد الواحد بن علي الحلبي» المعروف بأبي الطيب اللغوي.
كما لمع عدد من الشعراء المعروفين، مثل أبو الطيب المتنبي، و‌أبو فراس الحمداني، والخالديان: أبو عثمان، و‌السرى الرفاء والصنوبري، و‌الوأواء الدمشقي، والسلامي والنامي. وظهر كذلك عدد كبير من الأدباء المشهورين، وفي طليعتهم أبو الفرج الأصفهاني صاحب كتاب الأغاني الذي أهداه إلى سيف الدولة فكافأه بألف دينار، و‌ابن نباتة الفارقي، و‌قسطاكي الحمصي الشاعر والمؤرخ، وظهر أيضا بعض الجغرافيين، مثل: ابن حوقل الموصلي صاحب كتاب المسالك والممالك.

وتشتهر حلب بالفرق الموسيقية الحلبية التقليدية التي تقوم بغناء الموشحات الدينية والقدود. ويشتهر قاطنو مدينة حلب بولعهم بالطرب والغناء والموسيقى وهي تعتبر عاصمة الطرب الأصيل في الوطن العربي. يقام على مسرح قلعة حلب سنوياً مهرجان الأغنية السورية وقد انطلق منها فنانون كبار ناشرين فنهم بمناطق كثيرة وفي مختلف التخصصات الفنية من غناء وموشحات وقدود حلبية وأناشيد دينية وتمثيل وغيرها. ووفد إلى حلب قديماً أهم أعلام الموسيقى العرب وأخذ من تراثها وفنها الكثيرون منهم سيد درويش وغيره حيث لا يزال كثير من مطربي هذه المدينة من رواد الطرب الأصيل في الوطن العربي وخاصة في فنون الموشحات والقدود الحلبية الشهيرة ومن أشهرهم عمالقة الطرب اليوم الفنان صباح فخري والفنان صبري مدلل وكثيرين في الموسيقى والموشحات والقدود والغناء الأصيل.
كما اشتهرت حلب بأنها كانت مهد النشيد المعاصر، الذي تميز بالمديح النبوي والالتزام، وكان أشهر رواده الأستاذ أبو الجود محمد منذر سرميني والأستاذ الترمذي المنشد محمد أبو راتب.
وتتنوع الفنون في حلب من فنون الموسيقى والغناء والتمثيل ولها أعلامها المشهورون على مستوى الوطن العربي، وتشتهر حلب بالفنون الأخرى مثل الفن التشكيلي والنحت وتنتشر في مدينة حلب معارض وأروقة الفن الراقي لفنانين وفنانات حلب وفيها الكثير من المدارس الفنية المتميزة وأساتذة فنانين كبار في الفن التشكيلي والنحت أمثال وهبي الحريري، لؤي كيالي، عبد الرحمن موقت، سعد يكن، وفي الرسم والخط العربي ناهد كوسا. وكذلك في مجال الثقافة والأدب أمثال وليد إخلاصي، نهاد سيريس، ضياء قصبجي، والشعراء أمثال عمر أبو ريشة ونورس يكن من أدباء وشعراء حلب أيضاً: الشاعرة ملكة أبيض زوجة الشاعر سليمان العيسى - الأديب وليد إخلاصي - الشاعرة بهيجة مصري إدلبي. - الأديب محمود محمد أسد - الأديب محمد خير الدين الأسدي، عبد الكريم الأشتر، محمد التونجي - ليلى منير أورفلي. - عمر البابا - أحمد علي بابللي - عصام ترشحاني. - الأديبة رياض الجابري - شكيب الجابري. -مأمون الجابري. -فريد جحا. - عبد الله يوركي حلاق - الأديب قسطاكي حمصي - إبراهيم الحوراني - عائشة الدباغ - عمر الدقاق - سامي دهان - أحمد دوغان - نهاد رضا - جورج سالم - ليلى صايا سالم - الروائي فاضل السباعي - محمود علي السعيد - محمد الزينو السلوم - عبد الوهاب صابوني - جورج طرابيشي. - محمد عزام - كامل الغزي - محمود فاخوري. - محمد قجة - سلمان قطاية - ضياء قصبجي - عبد الفتاح قلعه جي - قدري قلعه جي - عبد الرحمن أبو قوس - عبد الرحمن الكواكبي - سامي الكيالي - قدري مايو - أحمد زياد محبك - سليمى محجوب - نظار نظاريان - مختار النعال. إذ تنتشر في مدن ومناطق حلب المراكز الثقافية والأدبية الكثيرة منها: دار الكتب الوطنية، والمراكز الثقافية في العزيزية وباب الفرج والصاخور والفردوس.

المطبخ الحلبي
يتميز المطبخ السوري بشكلٍ عام والمطبخ الحلبي بشكلٍ خاص بتنوع أطباقه، الأطباق السورية غنية بالزيتون، البندق والفستق، وحلب بالذات مشهورة بأطباقها اللذيذة وبحب أهلها للقمة الهنيئة، ويُقال (حلب أرض المحاشي والكبب) أو كما يُقال بين السكان المحليين (حلب ام المحاشي والكبب)، لذلك ليس من المفاجئ بأن يفوز مطبخها بجائزة التذوق العالمية من قبل أكاديمية الطهي والتذوق العالمية من فرنسا عام 2007
ولكن في الحقيقة، فإن حلب كانت عاصمةً للطبخ قبل جائزة باريس بكثير، ربما يعود السبب إلى تمازج عديد من الإثنيات فيها، الأمر الذي ساعد على تعدد أنواع الأطباق، نظراً لأنها كانت جزءاً من الدولة العثمانية. فهي تحتوي على الكثير من الأصناف مثل الكباب، الكبة، اليبرق (محشي ورق العنب)، محاشي الباذنجان والكوسا، اللحمة بالكرز، السماقية، السفرجلية.
يعتبر إفطار الفول المدمس إفطاراً تقليدياً في مدينة حلب، مضافاً إليه الزيت وعصير الليمون والفلفل الأحمر. وتعتبر الكبة أحد اختصاصات المطبخ الحلبي الأثيرة وأكثر أكلة محبوبة من قبل السكان، ابتكر الحلبيون أكثر من 17 نوعاً من أنواع الكبب المشهورة في الديار الشامية.
حلب أيضاً مركزُ هام لصناعة الحلويات، والتي تتميز باحتوائها على نسب كبيرة من الزبدة والسكر، مثل المبرومة، سوار الست، البللورية، بالإضافة لأصنافٍ أخرى مثل المامونية، الشعيبيات، المشبك، الزلابية، غزل البنات. وتتضمن معظم هذه الحلويات الجوز والقشطة و‌الفستق الحلبي الشهير.

الرياضة
تعتبر كرة القدم اللعبة الأكثر شعبية في المدينة، تضم المدينة نادي الإتحاد (الأهلي) لكرة القدم بالإضافة لنادي الحرية (العربي)، وتفخر حلب بملعبها الدولي والذي يتسع لأكثر من 75 ألف متفرج.
تتضمن الأندية الرياضية الأساسية:

نادي الاتحاد
نادي الحرية
نادي الجلاء
نادي اليرموك
نادي العروبة
نادي عفرين
نادي الحرفيين
كرة السلة لعبة شعبية أيضاً في المدينة، والتي تضم 4 نوادٍ من بين أفضل 12 ناد سلة سوري، بينما في فرق السيدات فحلب تحتوي على 5 نوادٍ من الدوري الممتاز مشكلة بذلك نسبة 50% من المشاركة موسم 2010 - 2011.
كما توجد رياضات أخرى مثل كرة الطاولة و‌السباحة من بين الرياضات المفضلة لدى الحلبيين.

النقل والمواصلات
السكك الحديدية
كانت مدينة حلب من المدن الأولى في سوريا التي تصلها خطوط النقل الحديدي، وذلك عندما قامت السلطات العثمانية ببناء سكة حديد بغداد عبر المدينة عام 1919 (ومنها أخذت محطة القطار اسمها محطة بغداد)، والتي تمتد حتى أنقرة وما تزال موجودةً حتى يومنا هذا، وتوجد أيضاً خطوط تصل ما بين حلب ودمشق ضمن خط حديد الحجاز الشهير الذي أنشئ أيضاً بدعم من الإمبراطور غليوم الألماني بغرض تسهيل نقل الحجاج إلى الحرمين الشريفين في الحجاز وحتى إسطنبول، ولهذه الأسباب التاريخية يتواجد مقر شركة الخطوط الحديدية السورية في حلب وليس في دمشق. نظراً لقدم عمر هذه الشبكات فقد تباطأت حركة الشحن والنقل للمسافرين خصوصاً نحو ميناء اللاذقية، إلا أن هذه الحركة عادت لتنشط 2005 مع استقدام قطارات الترين سيت الكورية الجنوبية لتصبح هناك رحلات منتظمة لكل من اللاذقية ودمشق كل ساعتين، مع خدمة جيدة المستوى.

المطار
يخدم المدينة مطار دولي يعتبر الحظيرة الثانية لطائرات الخطوط الجوية السورية، تعود بداياته لأوائل القرن العشرين، وتم بناؤه تدريجياً وتطويره حتى عام 1999 عندما اعتُمدت قاعة المطار الجديدة.

التخطيط المستدام في حلب
يعتبر التخطيط المستدام سمةً أساسية لتطور المدن الحديثة، وكان لا بد للمدينة أن تهتم بهذا الجانب من أجل الحفاظ على موقعها ومكانتها المحلية والدولية، مما جعلها تنخرط في عدد من مشاريع التخطيط والتنمية المستدامة ورفع السوية الإدارية للموظفين.
إن التنمية العمرانية المتكاملة في مدينة حلب UDP هي ثمرةُ للتعاون بين الوكالة الألمانية للتطور التقني ومجلس مدينة حلب. يهدف هذا البرنامج إلى تطوير الإمكانات المحلية في مجال التنمية والإدارة العمرانية.

للبرنامج ثلاثة مجالات عمل أساسية:

استراتيجية تنمية مدينة حلب CDS: وتدعم الإدارات المحلية وزيادة الفاعلية، وتشجيع الحوار مع خطة التطوير الوطنية.
السكن العشوائي IS وكافة الاستراتيجيات لتطويره وتأهيله.
مشروع إحياء مدينة حلب القديمة OCA
ويقوم المشروع بالتنسيق والتعاون مع كافة المبادرات في هذه المجالات مثل برنامج تطوير الإدارة المحلية للاتحاد الأوروبي، والمقرر أن يدوم بين عامي 2007 - 2016.

المدن الشقيقة واتفاقيات التوأمة
حالياً توجد لحلب علاقة تعاون وتوأمة مع أربع مدن:

 إزمير، تركيا منذ 5 أيار عام 1995
 ليون، فرنسا منذ 18 تشرين الأول عام 2000.
 غازي عنتاب، تركيا، منذ 13 تشرين الثاني عام 2005.
 برست بيلاروسيا منذ 28 كانون الثاني 2010.

الاقتصاد
التجارة في حلب
إن وجود المدينة الأساسي كان معتمداً عبر العصور على موقعها المفتاحي الهام على طرق التجارة، ما بين الهند و‌الصين وبلاد الشام و‌البحر الأبيض المتوسط و‌البحر الأحمر، كانت حلب المدينة الثالثة من حيث النشاط التجاري في العهد العثماني بعد إسطنبول و‌القاهرة. تضرب التقاليد التجارية بجذورها العميقة في المدينة وتسري في دمها، وهي مشهورة بطبقة تجارها المحنكين، واستمرت هذه الريادة حالياً مع إنشاء غرفة تجارة حلب عام 1885، كواحدة من أقدم غرف التجارة في الشرق الأوسط والعالم العربي.

الصناعات التقليدية
تم حفظ الصناعات اليدوية العريقة بشكل جيد في أجزاء حلب القديمة كالحفر والنقش على الزجاج والصناعات النحاسية. حلب أيضاً مركزُ هام لمشغولات الذهب والصياغة والأحجار الكريمة.
اكتسب صابون غار حلب شهرةً عالميةً في الآفاق، ويعتبر أجود وأول نوع من الصابون القاسي ينتج في العالم. وهو لايزال يصنع في المصابن (مصانع الصابون) التقليدية التراثية في حلب القديمة وفق الطرق القديمة المتوارثة أباً عن جد.
ولكونها محاطةً بحقول الزيتون والغار والفستق، فقد اكتسبت المدينة باعاً طويلاً في تصدير المنتجات الغذائية والصناعات الغذائية التحويلية المغذاة المرتبطة بها وبخيراتها.كالفستق المعروف عالميا باسمها الفستق الحلبي.كما تشتهر حلب بالصناعات المتعلقة بزيت الزيتون وخاصة الزيتون (العفريني) نسبة إلى منطقة عفرين التي تحوي غابات من أشجار الزيتون، وهو من أجود أنواع الزيتون في العالم و‌الزعتر الحلبي الملكي المعروف.

الصناعات الحديثة
حي الشيخ نجار هو المنطقة الصناعية الأساسية في المدينة، يحتل مساحة 4412 هكتاراً ليكون أحد أضخم الأحياء الصناعية في المنطقة، يقدر حجم الاستثمارات بأكثر من ملياري دولار حتى نهاية عام 2009، وهنالك الكثير من المشاريع الجارية لإنشاء فنادق فخمة، مراكز معارض وعدد من المنشآت الصناعية.
اقتصاد حلب عماده صناعات النسيج، الصناعات الكيميائية، الصناعات الدوائية، الصناعات الغذائية الخفيفة، الصناعات الكهربائية، الصناعات الهندسية والسياحة. وهي مركز التصنيع الأساسي في سوريا، باحتوائها على أكثر من 50% من العمالة الصناعية وأكثر من نصف حصة التصدير.
قائمة بالصناعات الأساسية:

الصناعات الكهربائية خصوصاً الكهربائيات المنزلية.
الصناعات الإلكترونية الصناعية ودارات التحكم
صناعات هندسية مختلفة (برادات صناعية - صناعات الطاقة الشمسية والسخانات).
صناعة الأقمشة والنسيج
صناعة الخيوط وحلج القطن
صناعة الملابس الجاهزة
صناعة الزيوت النباتية
الصناعات الدوائية
الصناعات الكيماوية
صناعة خطوط الكهرباء والكابلات
صناعات الألبان
صناعة التجهيزات الطبية
الصناعات الغذائية المختلفة
دباغة الجلود

السياحة
تتمتع حلب بعوامل ومقومات كثيرة في مجال السياحة وتنتشر الأماكن الأثرية بكثرة في هذه المدينة التي تعتبر أهم مدن الشرق وفي مدن وقرى محافظة حلب كالقلاع والمتاحف والأديرة والكنائس والمساجد والأسواق الشرقية الشهيرة، والعديد من المصايف والأماكن الطبيعية والغابات الرائعة في ريف المحافظة، وعدد من الفنادق الدولية ومن مختلف المستويات ومدن الألعاب (كمدينة حلب المائية)، والمنتزهات والحدائق الجميلة والكازينوهات والمقاهي والمطاعم. وتشتهر حلب بمطاعمها العريقة المشهورة بتقديم بأكلاتها المعروفة الشهيرة مثل الكبة والكباب المشوي.
وتقام في مدينة حلب مهرجانات وعروض سنوية عديدة أهمها، مهرجان و‌كرنفال القطن السنوي، و‌مهرجان الأغنية السورية،

و‌مهرجان المسرح و‌مهرجان السياحة والتسوق وغيرها من المعارض الصناعية مثل المعارض الصناعية إضافة للفعاليات العديدة في مدن المحافظة على مدار العام. وقد حولت العديد من البيوت الحلبية الأثرية إلى فنادق ومطاعم بمستوى عالمي يزورها السياح الأجانب والباحثين عن التميز في هذه المدينة العريقة من مختلف دول العالم.

أهم المواقع الأثرية المحافظة
قلعة حلب
قلعة ودير سمعان
النبي هوري
عين دارة
جعده المغارة
بالس
وادي الساحور - دير سرياني
تل أحمر وتل الشيوخ
الجسور الرومانية على نهر عفرين
قنسرين
الناقوطة
كهف الديدرية
القرامل
قرية براد الأثرية
مدفن مار مارون
قرية قصر البريج

أعلام ومشاهير
وُلد وتربى ولمعَ في حلب كمٌ هائلٌ من العظماء والمشاهير، الذين ليسَ من الممكن حصرهم في قائمة، نذكر منهم:

أعلام ومشاهير قدامى
أبو القاسم الخرقي
مار مارون
ابن خالويه
أبو الفتح ابن جني 
الناصر يوسف
عبد الواحد بن علي الحلبي المعروف بأبي الطيب اللغوي.
أبو الطيب المتنبي
أبو فراس الحمداني
أبو بكر الصنوبري
أبو الفرج الأصفهاني
ابن نباتة السعدي
ابن اللبودي 
رشيد الدين علي بن خليفة 
نعمة الله ولي
البحتري أحد أعظم الشعراء.
ناظر الجيش 
أحمد بن عبد الله الشرباتي
المهمنداري
ابن يعيش النحوي من أبرز علماء اللغة العربية.
بهاء الدين بن النحاس نحويٌ كبير.
مريانا مراش.

أعلام ومشاهير معاصرون
محمد راغب الطباخ مؤرخ حلب.
مصطفى السباعي أحد أشهر مجددي القرنِ العشرين.
عبد الفتاح أبو غدة من مشاهير المحققين.
عبد الرحمن الكواكبي أحد قادة النهضة العربية.
سليمان الحلبي قاتل الجنرال كليبر قائد القوات الفرنسية خلال احتلالها مصر.
سعد الله الجابري أحد أشهر سياسيي سورية في القرن العشرين.
محمد نجيب سراج الدين عالمٌ موسوعي.
عبد الله سراج الدين عالمٌ متخصصٌ في الحديث الشريف.
سعد الله آغا القلعة مهندس ووزير سوري، وموسيقي وباحث في التراث العربي الموسيقي.
مصطفى برمدا حاكم دوله حلب .
محمود عكام مفكر ومجدد إسلامي ومفتي حلب.
عمر أبو ريشة من أبرز وجوه الشعر المعاصر.
مصطفى العقاد مخرج عالمي.
إدمون رباط مفكر قومي عربي وقانوني وباحث سوري.
عبد الفتاح قلعه جي شاعر وكاتب مسرحي سوري.
محمد فارس، رائد الفضاء السوري.
هيلاريون كابوتشي رجل دين مسيحي.
رشدي الكيخيا زعيم سياسي
أحمد أبو صالح، سياسي ووزير سابق.
عمر أبو قوس شاعر سوري.
خليل المرادي مفتي دمشق الشام.
محمد سعيد ادلبي عالمُ دينٍ معروف.
محمد علي الصابوني عالمٌ دينٍ معروف.
محمد النبهان عالمٌ كبير، مؤسس للمدرسة الكلتاوية.
كامل الغزي علامةٌ شهير.
خير الدين الأسدي مؤرخ.
محمد قجة مؤرخ وباحث سوري.
عبد القادر عيسى عالمٌ صوفي شاذليٌ.
محمد نور الدين الترمانيني، مؤلف وشاعر.
عبد السلام الترمانيني، مؤلف وشاعر.
رشاد برمدا وزير للدفاع.
ناظم القدسي رئيس للجمهورية.
أمين الحافظ رئيس للجمهورية.
محمد ناجي عطري رئيس وزراء سورية بين عامي 2003 و2011.
محمد سلقيني عالم دينٍ معروف.
مصطفى الزرقا من أبرز علماء الدين والفكر.
صباح فخري مغنٍ شهير.
ميادة الحناوي مغنية مشهورة مطربة الجيل.
صبري مدلل غنائي وملحن معروف.
حسن حفار، شيخ منشدي حلب.
شكيب الجابري روائي ومهندس في الكيمياء والمعادن ودكتور في العلوم الفيزيائية.
محمد ضياء الدين الصابوني لغوي وشاعر.
ليفون تير-بيتروسيان رئيس أرمينيا.
غسان مكانسي ممثل ومسرحي.
عثمان طه خطاط عالمي، كتب مصحف المدينة المنورة.
ابراهيم سلقيني أحد مشاهير فقهاء العصر.
عبد الرحمن حميدة عالم في الجغرافي، وصاحب مؤلفات تخصصية كثيرة.
محمد رواس قلعه جي مؤلف وموسوعي.
ميادة بسيليس مغنية مشهورة.
سمير كويفاتي ملحن ومؤلف موسيقي.
حازم شريف نجم غنائي.
فايا يونان نجمة غنائية.
شهد برمدا نجمة غنائية.
سلوم حداد ممثل.
محمد خير الجراح ممثل.
بسام كوسا ممثل.
عمر حجو ممثل.
الليث حجو ممثل.
فادي أسعد شاعر.
محمد خيري مطرب.
نور مهنا مطرب.
نعمت قسومة، مغنية.

انظر أيضًا
قائمة أعلام حلب

وصلات خارجية
سيريا غيت
قلعة حلب
الجالية السورية في مونتريال
شاميات
صور من موقع حلب اليوم
مدونة وطن
موقع أرض الحضارات

المراجع


=== فهرس المراجع ===


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 4,060
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alep
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Alep (en arabe : حلب / ḥalab) est une ville de Syrie, chef-lieu du gouvernorat d'Alep, le gouvernorat de Syrie le plus peuplé, situé dans le nord-ouest du pays. Pendant des siècles, Alep a été la ville la plus grande de la région syrienne et la troisième plus grande ville de l'Empire ottoman (après Constantinople et Le Caire). Avec une population de 2 132 100 habitants en 2004, Alep était la ville la plus peuplée du pays et du Levant avant l'arrivée de la guerre civile.
Située à l'emplacement de l'antique Bérée (en grec ancien : Βέροια / Béroia ; en latin : Berœa), Alep est une ancienne métropole, l'une des plus vieilles villes du monde à avoir été constamment habitée, étant habitée depuis le VIe millénaire av. J.-C. Son importance historique est attribuée à son emplacement stratégique en tant que centre de commerce à mi-chemin entre la mer Méditerranée et la Mésopotamie (l'Irak moderne), puis à sa situation sur la route de la soie.
Lorsque le canal de Suez a été inauguré en 1869, le commerce a été dévié vers la mer et Alep commença à décliner doucement. À la chute de l'Empire ottoman après la Première Guerre mondiale, Alep céda le nord de son arrière-pays à la Turquie moderne de la même manière que le chemin de fer Berlin-Bagdad.
Dans les années 1940, la ville a perdu son principal accès à la mer lorsqu'Antioche et Alexandrette sont rattachées à la Turquie. Ce déclin a contribué à la préservation de l'ancienne ville d'Alep, son architecture médiévale et son patrimoine traditionnel classé au patrimoine mondial de l'humanité par l'Unesco en 1986. Au cours des années 1990 et 2000, la ville montre un nouveau dynamisme et une forte croissance, mais elle subit d'importantes destructions au cours de la bataille d'Alep de 2012 à 2016.

Toponymie
L'interprétation selon laquelle le nom de la ville viendrait de « halab Ibrahim » (« Abraham a trait ») (arabe : حَلَب ḥalab, traire (le lait) ou Alep) est totalement contestée sur le plan historique et linguistique.[réf. nécessaire]
Le nom francophone Alep dérive du nom arabe prononcé Halab. Une hypothèse fait remonter ce mot à l'amorrite Halaba au deuxième millénaire av. J.-C. signifiant « blanc » en référence à la couleur de la terre et du marbre abondant dans la région. Elle a aussi pour surnom en arabe moderne ach-Chahbaa' (الشهباء), qui veut aussi dire « la blanche ».

Géographie
La ville d'Alep est située au nord-ouest de la Syrie, au bord de la rivière Qouweiq (connue pour le massacre portant son nom), sur un plateau à 380 mètres d'altitude, à 120 km de la mer Méditerranée et à 45 km de la frontière turque.

Climat
La situation septentrionale d'Alep en Syrie permet à la ville de bénéficier d'un climat méditerranéen, plutôt sec et avec des influences continentales se caractérisant par des étés très chauds et secs et par des hivers frais et pluvieux contrairement au sud de la Syrie, caractérisée par un climat désertique chaud.

Histoire
Antiquité
C'est une des plus anciennes villes habitées au monde : elle existe déjà à l'époque paléo-babylonienne (2004–1595 av. J.-C.), sous le nom de Halab. Des fouilles archéologiques à Tell as-Sawda et Tell al-Ansari, juste au sud de l'ancienne ville d'Alep, montrent que la zone était occupée par les Amorrites au moins dans la dernière partie du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. ; de plus Alep est mentionnée pour la première fois dans des tables cunéiformes exhumées à Ebla et en Mésopotamie, faisant partie de l'État amorrite de Yamkhad et connu pour ses compétences militaires et commerciales.
En 1595 av. J.-C., elle est prise par les Hittites et devient une grande étape pour les caravanes entre la Syrie et la Mésopotamie.
Vers l'an mille av. J.-C., Alep devient la plaque tournante du marché du savon dans le monde connu, position qu'elle garde jusqu'aux temps modernes. En 738 av. J.-C., elle est rattachée à l'Assyrie sous le nom de Halman. Elle est conquise par Alexandre le Grand en 333 av. J.-C. et passe ensuite aux Séleucides, avec Séleucos Ier qui y établit une colonie hellénistique baptisée Beroia, d'après la ville éponyme de Macédoine (et francisée en Béroé). Le Nord de la Syrie est alors en plein épanouissement économique et culturel et certaines cités, comme Beroia, jouissent d'une grande autonomie avec une boulè prenant des mesures sans contraintes au sein de l'Empire séleucide.
Elle est ensuite occupée en 88 av. J.-C. par Tigrane le Grand et entre dans le royaume d'Arménie, mais Tigrane est vaincu par les Romains et Pompée fait de la Syrie en 64 av. J.-C. une province romaine. Cela donne une certaine stabilité à la région pendant trois siècles dont Beroia profite largement. La province est administrée par un légat. L'administration et l'élite continuent à parler grec qui sert également de lingua franca dans tout le Moyen-Orient.
La prospérité de la période romaine implique un accroissement de population, notamment dans le Nord de la Syrie, qui se poursuit avec encore plus d'intensité sous l'ère byzantine, jusqu'à la fin du Ve siècle. Beroia est à la fin de l'Antiquité la deuxième ville de Syrie romaine après Antioche (capitale de la Syrie romaine et troisième ville de l'Empire romain). Les découvertes archéologiques apportent la preuve d'une grande densité de population et de nombreux villages dans le Nord de la Syrie entre Antioche et Beroia, jusqu'au VIe siècle. Il y avait de grands domaines agricoles, des villas romaines et de grandes églises, comme en témoignent les ruines de l'église Saint-Siméon-le-Stylite au mont Siméon. Beroia est citée dans le deuxième livre des Maccabées (13, 3) de l'Ancien Testament.

Période romaine et byzantine
Les noms de plusieurs évêques de Beroia de la province de Syria Prima sont rapportés dans les documents écrits qui nous sont parvenus. L'un des premiers est saint Eustathe d'Antioche qui, après avoir été évêque de Beroia, est devenu patriarche d'Antioche, juste avant le premier concile de Nicée en 325. Son successeur sur le siège de Beroia est l'évêque Cyrus dont on rappelle la fidélité au symbole de Nicée qui lui vaut l'exil de la part de l'empereur Constance II. Après le concile de Séleucie en 359, convoqué par Constance, Mélèce est transféré de Sebastia à Beroia (Béroé), mais l'année suivante, il est promu au siège d'Antioche. Son successeur à Beroia est Anatolius qui assiste au concile d'Antioche en 363. Sous la persécution de l'empereur Valens, l'évêque est un certain Theodotus, ami de Basile le Grand. Acace de Béroé lui succède et reste en place pendant cinquante ans. Il participe au premier concile de Constantinople en 381 et au concile d'Éphèse de 431. Théoctiste arrive ensuite en 438. Il participe au concile de Chalcédoine en 451 et signe en 458 une supplique des évêques de la province de Syrie à l'empereur Léon le Thrace à propos du meurtre de Protérius d'Alexandrie. En 518, l'empereur Justin Ier exile l'évêque de Béroé (Beroia) Antonin pour avoir rejeté le concile de Chalcédoine. Le dernier évêque connu de ce siège est Megas, qui participe à un synode en 536, convoqué par Mennas de Constantinople. Après la conquête arabe, Béroé cesse d'être un siège ecclésiastique. C'est aujourd'hui un siège titulaire (in partibus) pour l'Église catholique.
Quelques rares éléments architectoniques demeurent de cette période, notamment dans la citadelle d'Alep. Ses deux mosquées sont d'anciennes églises byzantines reconverties en mosquées sous les Mirdassides au XIe siècle.

Moyen Âge
En 540, le roi persan sassanide Khosro Ier incendie la ville; que Justinien reprendra et rebâtira.
Elle est conquise par les Arabes commandés par Khalid ibn al-Walid en 637. La ville s'étend et de nouveaux remparts sont érigés pour intégrer l'expansion. Les musulmans bâtissent les principaux monuments de la ville : la grande mosquée, bâtie en 715 par le calife Al Walid, reconstruite en 1129 par Nur ad-Din, la Madrassé Halawiyé (école), sur l'emplacement de l'ancienne cathédrale Sainte-Hélène, la citadelle, bâtie par l'émir hamdanide Ali Sayf al-Dawla, les souks (marchés couverts), les khans (caravansérails).
Sous les Omeyyades, la ville connaît une certaine stagnation. En 944, elle devient la capitale des Hamdanides. C'est l'âge d'or d'Alep. L'émir Sayf al-Dawla en fait un prestigieux centre littéraire et le point chaud de la lutte entre les musulmans et les Byzantins. En 962, Alep est prise et incendiée par le général byzantin Nicéphore II Phocas. La ville est reprise par les Hamdanides et reconstruite mais ne recouvre pas sa splendeur. Elle passe ensuite aux Fatimides puis aux Seldjoukides. Possession du sultanat de Roum, elle est conquise en 1086 par Tutuş, émir de Damas, qui se proclame ensuite sultan seldjoukide de Syrie. À sa mort, ses émirats sont partagés entre ses deux fils, qui se détestent. Il va s'ensuivre une rivalité entre les deux émirats qui va survivre longtemps à l'extinction de la descendance de Tutuş.
En 1098 et 1124, Alep est assiégée par les croisés, qui échouent devant ses murs. En représailles aux exactions commises par le comte d'Édesse en 1123 dans les environs d'Alep, le cadi de la ville fait détruire le chœur de la plupart des églises et les transforme en mosquées. Lié à Mossoul qui le protège des attaques des Latins, l'émirat se retrouve dans l'empire zengide, avant de devenir le centre du pouvoir de Nur ad-Din.
En 1138 a lieu un des tremblements de terre les plus mortifères de l'histoire. En 1183, il revient à Saladin et à la dynastie des Ayyoubides. Alep devient alors un grand centre de vie intellectuelle et religieuse ; de nombreuses madrasas y sont élevées ; sa citadelle et ses murailles sont rebâties.
En 1260, Alep est prise par les Mongols avant d'être reprise par les mamelouks en 1317. Après sa prise en main par les mamelouks, ces derniers décident d'entamer une reconstruction de la cité qui retrouve sa magnificence. Dans la deuxième moitié du XIVe siècle, on rapporte que les édifices construits à Alep dépassent en beauté ceux de Damas, plusieurs institutions religieuses et éducatives sont construites ainsi que des Khans remarquables, La ville retrouve à cette période une place commerciale et artisanale majeure et devient un carrefour de circulation des biens et marchandises dans la région.
En 1400, le Turco-Mongol Tamerlan reprend la cité aux mamelouks. Il préside au massacre d'une grande partie de ses habitants et il ordonne qu'une tour de vingt mille crânes soit érigée à l’extérieur de la ville. Après le retrait des Mongols, la population musulmane retourne à Alep, alors que les chrétiens préfèrent s'établir dans le nouveau quartier de Jdeïdé-Salibé au cours du XVe siècle.
La ville renaît au XVe siècle pour devenir une grande place commerciale entre l'Orient et l'Occident, pratiquant surtout le commerce de la soie.

Époque ottomane
En 1516, elle est annexée par l'Empire ottoman, qui la conserve jusqu'en 1918. Au XVIIe siècle, la ville est la troisième de l'Empire avec 120 000 habitants. Elle est la capitale du pachalik d'Alep puis du vilayet d'Alep.
En 1682, dans son ouvrage Théâtre de la Turquie, où sont représentées les choses les plus remarquables qui s'y passent…, le missionnaire capucin Michel Febvre décrit une ville cosmopolite où quatorze religions différentes cohabitent formant autant de nations et de langues. Parmi les non-chrétiens, il cite les Turcs, les Arabes, les Kurdes, les Druzes, les Turcomans, les Yazidis et les Juifs. Parmi les chrétiens, il cite les maronites, les grecs-orthodoxes, les Arméniens, les syriaques, les nestoriens, les coptes ; les minorités chrétiennes sont spécialisées dans la production textile ; certains font partie d'une véritable aristocratie, comme le laisse découvrir la maison Ghazaleh, splendide demeure ottomane, ayant appartenu pendant deux siècles à une riche famille chrétienne.
À partir du XVIIe siècle, le déclin des voies commerciales terrestres entre l'Extrême-Orient et le Proche-Orient entraîne celui de la ville. Celle-ci reste cependant un centre économique et culturel important : en 1706, la première imprimerie du Proche-Orient est créée par le patriarche Athanase IV d'Antioche pour répandre les textes religieux chrétiens.
Le XIXe siècle est particulièrement troublé à cause du déclin de l'Empire ottoman. Entre 1812 et 1819, la ville est occupée par les janissaires révoltés. En 1822, Alep subit des destructions à la suite d'un séisme. En 1832, la ville passe sous administration égyptienne comme toute la Syrie. Les tensions entre les communautés sont exacerbées. En 1860, a lieu un pogrom antichrétien. Au XIXe siècle, Alep joue un certain rôle dans la renaissance arabe : c'est d'Alep qu'est originaire le grand réformateur al-Kawakibi. À la fin du XIXe siècle, la ville se modernise et la périphérie se développe. De nombreux ingénieurs allemands y demeurent au début du XXe siècle pendant la construction du Bagdadbahn, ce qui attire des espions britanniques, parmi lesquels Lawrence d'Arabie, qui descendent au fameux nouvel hôtel Baron.

Époque contemporaine
En octobre 1918, lors de la bataille d'Alep, la ville est enlevée aux Turcs par les insurgés arabes et les Britanniques d'Edmund Allenby. Elle est rattachée à la Syrie sous mandat français. Elle est l'éphémère capitale de l'État d'Alep entre 1920 et 1925. Agatha Christie y séjourne en 1930.
Cependant, jusqu'en 1940, le tissu historique reste presque intact, une majorité des Alépins continuant de vivre dans la vieille ville. En 1944, la population de la ville s'élève à environ 325 000 habitants dont 112 110 (34,5 %) sont chrétiens (parmi lesquels 60 200 sont d'origine arménienne). En décembre 1947, le pogrom d'Alep, une émeute antisémite, éclate dans la ville faisant 75 morts et de nombreuses destructions dans la communauté juive locale. Le jardin public d'Alep est inauguré en 1949 ; de grands travaux modernisent la ville à cette époque.
En 1973, après que Hafez el-Assad a proposé une constitution laïque pour le pays, des émeutes islamistes éclatent à Alep. Celui-ci est contraint de trouver un compromis et fait inscrire dans la Constitution que le Président doit être musulman. La fin des années 1970 est marquée par le massacre de l'École d'artillerie d'Alep le 16 juin 1979 par les Frères musulmans qui exécutent 83 cadets de l'armée, principalement des Alaouites.
À partir des années 1990, à la suite de mesures de libéralisation des échanges avec la Turquie, la ville connaît une période de croissance, et devient la capitale économique du pays, appréciée pour son dynamisme et son esprit d'entreprise. Elle connaît également une forte croissance démographique provoquée par un exode rural.

En 2006, la ville gagne le titre de Capitale arabe de la culture islamique.

Avant la guerre civile syrienne
Avant le conflit, Alep atteint presque trois millions d'habitants, les sunnites arabes sont majoritaires et représentent 65 % de la population, les Kurdes 20 %, les chrétiens 10 %, les alaouites 5 %, sans compter une petite minorité de Druzes et d'ismaéliens. La population est jeune, près de 40 % de sa population a moins de 15 ans.
C'est une ville industrielle et commerçante, véritable capitale économique de la Syrie. Les quartiers de l'ouest et du centre, avec notamment Chahba et Haleb el-Jedid (le Nouvel Alep), sont les plus riches, habités par la bourgeoisie, les chrétiens et les Alépins d'origine. Les quartiers est, comme Sakhour, Chaar, Salheen et Hanano, sont les plus modestes, peuplés par une population originaire des campagnes. Le quartier d'Hamdaniyé, au sud-est, est celui des fonctionnaires, là où les alaouites sont également les plus présents. Les Kurdes occupent quant à eux principalement le quartier de Cheikh Maqsoud, au nord.

La guerre civile des années 2010
À partir de 2011, la ville est le théâtre de manifestations contre le régime de Bachar el-Assad, sans être toutefois les plus massives observées dans le pays. La population est divisée et conserve le souvenir de la répression du siège de 1980 et 1981.
La bataille d'Alep commence le 19 juillet 2012 par une offensive des rebelles. Rapidement, ces derniers s'emparent de plusieurs quartiers mais échouent à emporter la totalité de la ville. Alep se retrouve alors divisée entre les quartiers ouest, tenus par le régime, et les quartiers est, tenus par l'opposition.

Pendant plusieurs années, loyalistes et rebelles s'affrontent dans la ville d'Alep. Des dizaines des factions armées combattent dans les deux camps. De 2012 à 2014, le groupe rebelle dominant à Alep est le Liwa al-Tawhid, affilié à l'Armée syrienne libre, mais ce dernier se désagrège après la mort de son chef Abd al-Qader Salah. En 2015, plusieurs dizaines de groupes insurgés se rassemblent au sein de la coalition Fatah Halab. De son côté, l'armée arabe syrienne est progressivement supplantée par des groupes paramilitaires locaux et des milices chiites irakiennes, libanaises et afghanes soutenus par l'Iran. L'État islamique en Irak et au Levant s'implante également à Alep en 2013, mais il en est chassé en janvier 2014 par les rebelles. De leur côté, les Kurdes des YPG tiennent un quartier au nord de la ville, et nouent ponctuellement des alliances opportunistes, tantôt avec le régime et tantôt avec les rebelles.
L'intervention militaire de la Russie à la fin de l'année 2015 finit par faire pencher la balance en faveur du régime. En juillet 2016, Alep-Est est totalement encerclée. Depuis l'extérieur, l'Armée de la conquête parvient en août à faire une percée et à briser le siège, mais ce dernier est rétabli en septembre. Deux cent cinquante à trois cent vingt-six mille personnes se retrouvent alors encerclées dans les quartiers est.
Au cours de la bataille, les bombardements commis aussi bien par les forces aériennes du régime que par les tirs d'artillerie rebelles font des milliers de victimes civiles, essentiellement dans les quartiers est. Proportionnellement, les frappes loyalistes et russes sont cependant d'une ampleur bien supérieure. Le camp loyaliste largue des barils explosifs par hélicoptère (y compris certaines contenant du chlore, on parle alors d'attaques chimiques attribuées aux deux camps, mais seules des attaques commises par le régime ont pu être mises en évidence), et bombarde intentionnellement les casernes des Casques blancs de la Défense civile syrienne et les hôpitaux. Après le début du siège, la population commence également à souffrir de la faim.
Le souk d'Alep est gravement incendié les 28 et 29 septembre 2012, la mosquée Khousrouwiyah datant du XVIe siècle est détruite par des bombardements rebelles à l'été 2014, ainsi que l'entrée de la citadelle d'Alep. La mosquée al-Atrouche est gravement endommagée, la bibliothèque des Waqifiyya incendiée, et le minaret de la mosquée omeyyade d'Alep tombe sous les bombardements. En tout, cent vingt-et-un bâtiments historiques sont détruits ou endommagés dans la vieille ville d'Alep. En octobre 2016, l'ONU annonce qu'Alep-Est pourrait être « totalement détruite » d'ici à la fin 2016. La bataille d'Alep prend fin le 22 décembre 2016 et se conclut par une victoire du régime syrien et de ses alliés après plus de quatre ans de violents combats, et le déplacement de la population assiégée. Les réflexions sur la reconstruction de la ville ont commencé.

Chute d'Alep (2024)
Dans la nuit du 29 au 30 novembre 2024, Alep est prise par le commandement des opérations militaires de l'opposition syrienne. Ce dernier instaure trois couvre-feu du 29 novembre au 1er décembre et prévoit de remettre l'administration de la ville au gouvernement de salut syrien (GSS) après la fin des opérations de déminage. Le 4 décembre 2024, le président du GSS, Mohammed al-Bachir, effectue « une visite d'inspection dans la ville d'Alep pour superviser le travail de revitalisation des institutions ». Le 8 décembre 2024, l'administration d'Alep est officiellement transférée au comité d'intervention d'urgence du GSS, réactivé le 27 novembre 2024 dans le cadre de l'opération Dissuasion de l'agression.

Patrimoine
La vieille ville
La vieille ville d'Alep est constituée d'un tissu urbain singulier qui témoigne de sa longue histoire marquée par différentes civilisations. Certaines constructions historiques se démarquent, notamment la citadelle d'Alep qui domine l'ensemble, mais aussi la grande mosquée, le souk, les madrasas et hammams.
Ce quartier historique est inscrit au patrimoine mondial de l'UNESCO en 1986. La municipalité commence un projet de réhabilitation en 1992, et crée le Directoire de la vieille ville en 1999 en ce sens. Mais à partir de 2012, de grandes destructions sont observées lors de la bataille d'Alep pendant la guerre civile.

Églises d'Alep
À partir du XVIIe siècle, les missionnaires catholiques venus d'Europe se déploient auprès des chrétiens orientaux de la ville qui existent ici depuis les origines du christianisme et formant une élite chrétienne encore présente aujourd'hui dans la ville. Cependant sur les 250000 chrétiens présents avant la guerre civile, les observateurs estiment qu'il n'en restait plus que 40000 à Alep-Ouest en 2017.

Cathédrale Notre-Dame d'Alep (melkite) ;
Cathédrale des Quarante-Martyrs (Alep) (arménienne), du XVe siècle ;
Cathédrale Saint-Joseph d'Alep (rite chaldéen) ;
Cathédrale Saint-Élie d'Alep (rite maronite) ;
Cathédrale Saint-François-d'Assise d'Alep (rite latin) ;
Cathédrale du Prophète Élie (Alep), siège de l'archidiocèse grec-orthodoxe d'Alep et d'Alexandrette ;
Église de la Dormition-de-la-Vierge-Marie d'Alep (grecque orthodoxe)
Église Sainte-Assia (Alep) (syriaque) ;
Église de la Sainte-Mère-de-Dieu (Alep) (arménienne) ;
Église Saint-Michel-Archange (melkite) ;
Église presbytérienne d'Alep (protestante) fondée en 1920.
Alep se trouve dans plusieurs juridictions :

Archéparchie d'Alep des arméniens ;
Archéparchie d'Alep des maronites ;
Archéparchie d'Alep des melchites ;
Archéparchie d'Alep des Syriens ;
Archidiocèse grec-orthodoxe d'Alep et d'Alexandrette ;
Vicariat apostolique d'Alep.

Cuisine
L'évolution la plus visible en termes de pratiques alimentaires concerne le développement des repas pris à l'extérieur. L'offre est croissante et contribue à ce déplacement progressif du lieu de consommation des repas. De nombreuses rues de la ville se transforment rapidement avec les nouveaux commerces et nouveaux espaces de consommation. L'émergence de nouvelles modes et pratiques alimentaires se fait au travers de ces nouveaux espaces de consommations. À l'origine, les restaurants sont destinés aux voyageurs de passage. Ils accueillent actuellement les familles, les hommes d'affaires et les groupes d'amis. La ville offre un éventail d'espaces de restauration à ambiances, décors, tablées et clientèles très variées. Certains restaurants délimitent un espace pour les femmes et les familles, et un espace pour les hommes.[réf. souhaitée]

Culture
Liste de personnalités nées à Alep
Autres personnalités :

Abu Firas al-Hamdani, poète ;
Al-Mutanabbi, poète ;
Émile Benveniste (né Ezra), linguiste (1902–1976).

Économie
Alep était, avant la guerre, la capitale économique du pays, avec plus de 97 000 entreprises privées, et 35 % des emplois manufacturiers du pays.
Alep, carrefour routier et ferroviaire historique affaibli au XXe siècle, a retrouvé son ancienne activité commerciale dans les années 1990. Son artisanat traditionnel est alors toujours florissant, et son activité industrielle se développe (industries agroalimentaires, textiles, cimenterie, verrerie, chimie, constructions mécaniques, etc.). La zone industrielle de Cheikh Najjar est aussi grande que la ville d'Alep elle-même. Elle comptait près de 3 000 usines, et représentait à elle seule le tiers de la production industrielle du pays, et le quart de ses exportations au déclenchement de la guerre civile en Syrie en 2012. La zone a été l'une des premières régions à être prise par la rébellion. Celle-ci a démantelé nombres d'usines et vendu les machines et autres équipements hors du pays.
Malgré son classement au patrimoine mondial de l'humanité, le tourisme n'était pas très développé avant la guerre. Pourtant la croissance de la ville s'accompagna dans les années 2000 d'un développement croissant de services pour les touristes : hôtels, restaurants et commerces reprennent ainsi possession des maisons nobles de la ville, des khans. Cette croissance s'est brutalement stoppée avec le début de la guerre…
Alep possède un aéroport international (code AITA : ALP) ; l'aéroport était le deuxième aéroport international de Syrie avant la guerre.

Sport
La ville accueille sur son territoire le stade international d'Alep qui a déjà accueilli une compétition internationale. La ville est aussi connue pour son club de football, Al Ittihad Alep, l'un des meilleurs de Syrie aux côtés du Club Al Jalaa Sport. Club Al Jalaa a été fondé en 1949 sous le nom الشبيبة الرياضية « la jeunesse sportive ». Dans ce club sont pratiqués plusieurs sports (tels que le tennis, le football, le volleyball, la natation) mais la renommée du club est surtout due au basket, un des sports les plus populaires à Alep.

Notes et références
Voir aussi
Articles connexes
Liste des émirs d'Alep
Zengides
Pachalik d'Alep
vilayet d'Alep
Bataille d'Alep (1918)
Bataille d'Alep
Citadelle d'Alep
Grande Mosquée d'Alep
Culture de la Syrie
Chrétiens d'Orient
Codex d'Alep
Savon d'Alep
Aéroport international d'Alep
Gare d'Alep
Liste des aires urbaines du Moyen-Orient
Lac Jabbūl
Bataille de Maskin

Liens externes

Site officiel
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online 
Ressource relative à la musique : MusicBrainz  

 Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Syrie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 3,504
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Aleppo
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Aleppo (حلب, Ḥalab) is the largest city in Syria, with a population of 2.1 million in 2021. One of the oldest continuously-inhabited cities in the world, it has a wealth of historical sites, and its old city is listed as a  UNESCO World Heritage Site.

## Understand
As it is in any Muslim country, the call to prayer is called out from mosques five times a day starting in the early morning. Aleppo's muezzins are traditionally well known for their beautiful calls to prayer.
Aleppo is a fairly conservative city. Dress appropriately to avoid any problems and to avoid standing out too much. Men should wear shirts and trousers and women should not wear anything that is too revealing.  If you follow that simple dress code you should not have any problems. Head scarves are not necessary unless you want to enter a mosque or church but even then grey robes are available at no extra charge.
Prior to the Syrian Civil War, Aleppo was known for its large Armenian community, many of whom were descended from refugees fleeing the Armenian Genocide, but it is unknown how many remain after the war.
Aleppo was the epicenter of the fighting during much of the Syrian Civil War which erupted as a result of the Arab Spring in 2010. Syrian government forces loyal to Bashar al-Assad eventually prevailed over the rebel groups following Russian intervention in 2016, thus returning all of the city of government control, but not before it had suffered over 30,000 deaths and much of the old city had been destroyed.
There are no hostile feelings towards Americans or Westerners in general (although Americans tend to be subjected to more scrutiny by the authorities than other nationalities). You could, however, find yourself in trouble if you engage in open criticism of and against the Syrian government or the president.  Your best bet is to avoid political conversations all together just to avoid any possible problems. If you do engage in political discussions with Syrians, be aware that they might face intense questioning by the secret police if you are overheard. As a general rule, always assume that you are being watched by the plain-clothes policemen (mukhabarat). You will notice that not many uniformed policemen can be seen in the streets, but this is because the police have a wide network of plain-clothes officers and informants.
Friday is a holy day and most shops and historic sites are closed so plan accordingly for this.
Stealing is looked down upon and thus is not very common.  Crime is generally low and you should feel safe to walk around in any part of the city at any time day or night. But as in any city, it's a good idea to keep an eye on your belongings, particularly in the souk.
Meals are a bit later than in the U.S. but similar to the times in some European countries.  Lunch is from 13:00 to 15:00 and dinner around 20:00. Syrians take a siesta in the middle of the day, from about 15:00 to 18:00, but this means that the night life is very active.  You can return to the markets and public squares that you visited during the day and by 22:00 they will be bustling with people selling food and treats and drinks.  It is a like a street fair every night.
Aleppo is a beautiful and historic city, but is too dangerous to recommend visiting.

## Climate
Aleppo has a cool steppe climate. The mountain series that run along the Mediterranean coast, the Alawiyin Mountains and the Nur Mountains, largely block the effects of the Mediterranean on climate (rain shadow effect). More than 80% of precipitation occurs between October and March. It snows once or twice every winter. Average humidity is 55.7%.

## Get in
As of 2019, travel to Aleppo is difficult as major highways are blocked by the civil war and travel on roads that are can take a long time due to frequent military checkpoints. It is however possible to travel overland from Damascus independently or by bus. Travel from Turkey is not possible.

## By plane
As of 2023 there's a limited number of scheduled flight to Aleppo, including a few international flights per week, to Yerevan (EVN IATA) and Erbil (EBL IATA). However, flights often have to be cancelled at short notice as the airport is a frequent target of Israeli missile strikes.
36.1846537.2273451 Aleppo International Airport (مطار حلب الدولي) (7 km east of the city centre). ALP  IATA.      (updated Oct 2021)

## By train
All long distance trains, including international trains, are cancelled indefinitely.  National operator CFS do run a local commuter train from the suburb and major refugee camp Jibreen, of little use to visitors.

## Get around
Taxis are everywhere, probably more taxis than people.  They are easy to take and very affordable but just make sure it is a licensed taxi.
Minibuses: Called "serveece", these are small white vans that drive around and you can hop on and off by signalling to the driver. They get very full in rush hours.
Rental cars: Hertz and other rental car agencies are available in Aleppo but the driving can be very hectic and if you are not accustomed to driving in a place with few rules and almost no regard for street signs you should probably not attempt to drive on your own.

## See
36.19933237.1627691 Citadel of Aleppo. On a hill in the centre of the city and is visible from almost anywhere. Usage of the Citadel hill dates back at least to the middle of the 3rd millennium BC, but the current structure dates from the 13th century. The citadel survived the fighting relatively intact and there are daily tours as of 2017.      (updated Oct 2017)
36.19800337.1564212 Al-Madina Souq. With a total length of almost 13 kilometers, this used to be the largest souk in the world and had all of the shopping you could want to do from gold and silver, boxes, clothing, fabric and soap. Severely damaged during the civil war. A small part of the souk called al-Saqatiyah reopened in 2019. Bargaining is encouraged and if you know some Arabic it will get you a much better price.      (updated Oct 2019)
36.20196137.14973 Central Synagogue of Aleppo. First built in the Byzantine period, perhaps as early as the 9th century before BCE.      (updated Jan 2020)
36.2040237.152754 Bab al-Faraj Clock Tower. Built in 1898-99 and a symbol of the city.   (updated Nov 2020)
36.20972237.1472225 Aleppo Public Park (الحديقة العامة بحلب). A 17 hectre public park, centrally located. Features a large number of sculptures and statues   (updated Nov 2020)
36.199837.1586 Khan al-Saboon (خان الصابون).  (updated Mar 2024)

## Museums
36.20349137.1503377 National Museum of Aleppo (متحف حلب الوطني), Baron St. Archaeological museum documenting the history of Syria, it was hit by missiles in 2016 and most artifacts evacuated. After extensive reparation, the museum re-opened in October 2019.      (updated Jun 2020)
36.19683337.1570668 Bimaristan Arghan. A beautiful mental hospital turned into a museum. Entrance is free and you can wander around and look at exhibits, which include old medical equipment, herbs, biographies of famous Arab scientists and other interesting artifacts. The main attractions, however, are the courtyard and two separate spaces reserved for the mentally ill.    (updated Feb 2018)
36.20605337.1565819 Popular Traditions Museum (بيت أجقباش في الجديدة). Housed in Beit Achiqbash, a prime example of an Aleppine courtyard mansion, built in the mid 18th Century. Badly damaged during the Civil War this mansion has now been reconstructed and the museum has reopened.   (updated Mar 2024)

## Mosques
36.19949237.15691110 Great Mosque of Aleppo (جامع حلب الكبير). Also known as the Umayyad Mosque of Aleppo is the largest and one of the oldest mosques in Aleppo, built between the 11th and 14th centuries. Its minaret, dating back to 1090 along with other parts of the mosque was destroyed during the Syrian civil war in April 2013. Both the mosque and its minaret are to be rebuilt during the coming years.      (updated Oct 2017)
36.19985437.16018511 Al-Saffahiyah Mosque. Built in 1425.      (updated Jun 2020)
36.194637.161912 Al-Tawashi Mosque. Historical mosque, dating back to the Mamluk period. It was built in 1348 by Safi ad-Dine Jawhar al-Allani al-Tawashi and enlarged in 1537 by Saadallah bin Ali bin Osman al-Malati.   (updated Nov 2020)
36.202537.16083313 Khanqah al-Farafira (خانقاه الفرافرة). A former Sufi monastery, completed in 1244 AD.   (updated Nov 2020)
36.203437.168214 Banqusa Mosque (جامع بانقوسا). Built in 1386 AD.  (updated Mar 2024)

## Churches
36.216337.162515 Bethel Church. Armenian Evangelical church, built in 1937.   (updated Mar 2021)
36.2071337.15581516 Cathedral of Saint Elijah (كاتدرائية القدّيِس الياس). Eastern Catholic (Maronite) church, built in 1873.      (updated Mar 2020)
36.20986537.15435717 Church of Saint Francis of Assisi (كنيسة القديس فرنسيس الأسيزي). Catholic church, built in 1937.      (updated Mar 2020)
36.20613437.15616718 Mar Assia al-Hakim Church (كنيسة مار آسيا الحكيم). Built in 1500.      (updated Mar 2020)
36.20619437.15530619 Forty Martyrs Cathedral (كنيسة الأربعين شهيد). Armenian Apostolic church, first constructed in 1491.   (updated Nov 2020)
36.20617237.15596620 Church of the Dormition of Our Lady (كنيسة رقاد السيدة العذراء) (In the Jdeydeh quarter). Greek Orthodox church built during the first half of the 15th century.   (updated Nov 2021)
36.212337.157721 Cathedral of Saint Ephrem the Syrian. Syriac Orthodox cathedral, built in 1926.    (updated Aug 2024)
36.2105637.1561122 Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption (كاتدرائية سيدة الانتقال). Main cathedral of the Syriac Catholic Church in Aleppo. An imposing modernist structure built in 1970.   (updated Aug 2024)
36.214937.153523 Cathedral of Saint Joseph (كاتدرائية القديس يوسف). Seat of the Chaldean Catholic Church in Aleppo, built in 1972.   (updated Aug 2024)

## Do
Walk around the city at least a few times to really get a feel for what it is like. It is a vibrant and lively place that will continually surprise you. Any amount of time spent walking around the city will reveal another historical site or point of interest. Check out the Christian section of the city to see a different part of Aleppo. If you want to shop for clothes, al-Telal street is bustling nearly every night with crowds checking out the shops and street stands piled high with every type of clothing imaginable.

## Buy
Gold: Although the prices are as high as they have ever been, gold is still a worthwhile purchase here. There is a special gold pattern called the Aleppo weave or chain that is made only in Aleppo. All gold is sold by weight and is 22 carat.
Boxes: Aleppo is also famous for its intricate inlay work that can be found in boxes of all shapes and sizes. These boxes are beautiful and can be found at almost all of the shops in the souq. A great, affordable gift to take home.
Wraps/tablecloths: There are many nice wraps that can be worn as shawls or used as tablecloths that are also available everywhere in the souqs. Another good gift.
Sweets: Pistachios are everywhere in Aleppo and accordingly there are many different kinds of sweets made from the pistachio. These usually come in a decorative box and are yet another good gift.
Coffee and spices: It is impossible to walk through the souq without being caught up in the scent of freshly ground coffee and spices like cumin. You can also buy very ornate pots to make your coffee in.
Soap: One of the most famous Aleppine products is its olive oil soap. Many factories produce this using traditional techniques. The price varies depending on the proportion of olive and laurel oil, prices and assortment is better in the shops just in the 2 roads south of the Clock Tower rather than in the Souq's tourist traps, even if most shop keepers speak very little English (prices per kilo are clearly shown).

## Eat
The area around Aleppo is famous for its pistachio farming, so be sure to try the baklava and other pistachio-based sweets while you're here.
Common Syrian street food like falafels and shwarma are excellent and available throughout the city. In the souks you will also find tiny restaurants with a few stools serving up dishes like Fuul (pronounced “fool”), a  bean soup served with fresh bread, onions and mint. If you are adventurous, look for the men frying curry-flavoured pancakes near the entrance to the souk. The pancakes are wrapped in bread and topped with hot sauce. Also try to buy some of the freshly made pita bread that is sold everywhere as it is delicious.
For breakfast, a fresh glass of juice and cheese sandwich can be had from the juice stands near the clock tower. Many cafés also serve great ice cream for a treat.
If you are tired after a day of wandering around the souk, try one of the cafés near the base of the citadel. They offer light snacks and drinks, including a wide range of coffees and refreshing glasses of minted lemonade.
Travellers on a strict budget should be prepared to eat very similar meals everyday as there is not a lot of variety in the diet at the cheaper end of the range.
There are plenty of good restaurants around and meals are very affordable.
36.20757237.1579841 Haj Abdo. Having been around since 1885, Haj Abdo is considered the best parlor of ful - a stew of cooked fava beans - in town.   (updated Nov 2020)

## In the Christian Quarter (El Jedeide) district
La Gondole, ☏ +963 21 4124095. Cafe and restaurant featuring a Swimming pool with a sitting table around the pool and outdoors bar under the sunshine.
Al Mir, ☏ +963 21 3336580. Cafe and restaurant featuring a rerrace with views over the Aleppo Citadel.
Beit Sissy. A particularly good choice. It has a beautiful courtyard and their shish kebab in cherry sauce is out of this world!
Sheraton Hotel. It may seem wrong to come to Syria and head for the Sheraton but they do offer an excellent buffet breakfast, which, if you're willing to splurge, makes a nice change from the typical Syrian fare and will set you up well for a day of exploring. They also do a fine cup of coffee.

## In Aziziyeh
Al- Challal
WANES  Restaurant

## Drink
Alcohol is permitted but not widely available. You can find stores selling liquor on a few streets near the clocktower. Try Zaki al-Arsuzi (across from Al Kommeh restaurant) and Jbrail Dalal streets.  There is a liquor store a few metres away from the Aleppo Hotel (on a side street from the clocktower).  In the new city there is a store at Al Hateb square.  Restaurants and hotels that cater to Westerners will generally serve alcoholic beverages.
There is one local beer, called Al-Sharq, while the Damascus brew Barada may also be found. Neither are exactly lethal - 3.7% and 3.4% respectively.
A wide range of other beers from the Middle East and Europe can also be found, along with wines from Syria, Lebanon and France.
Arak is a local aniseed spirit which can be found at some small shops.
36.19780737.1610951 Al Attar Cafe (مطعم و كافتيريا العطار) (In front of Aleppo citadel). Popular café with magnificent views over the entrance of Aleppo citadel.    (updated Sep 2018)

## Budget
Al-Gawaher – Bab al-Faraj Street, Behind Library. Perhaps the best backpacker spot in Aleppo. Rooms have satellite TV and both en suite and shared bathrooms are very clean. Many have balconies and others overlook a common area, where travellers often meet to chat. The rooftop gives great views over the city and is another nice spot to spend the evening. Staff are friendly and English is spoken. Tours can be arranged to the Dead Cities, Apamea and other sites. The only possible downside is that staff are late risers and so getting breakfast can be a problem. Breakfast is not included. There is, however, free coffee and tea available 24/7.
Hotel Alnagm Alakhdar (aka Hotel Green Star) – Around the corner from the Al-Gawaher on Sharia Hammam Al Tal (next to the Sheraton parking entrance off the Clock Tower end of Bab El Faraj - it could not be more central - 963-21-212 60 23, mob. 963 -944-25 76 45), it also has a nice roof terrace but the atmosphere is not nearly as lively. The rooms come with sinks and fans or air-con. There are no TVs in the rooms but two shared ones: one in the lounge and the second one on the top floor. Try to get one on the top floor that opens onto the roof terrace. Staff speak a little English but are very helpful. Breakfast is not included.
Hotel Kaser Alandaloss - Just off Bab Al-Faraj Street, in sight of the clock tower on a small block, nestled between a couple of soap merchant stores. The rooms are nice, and they have excellent showers and a comfortable central area to sit, eat, use the internet. There's no option for breakfast, but if you want some tea or some food, they are more than likely to make some for you.

## Mid-range
36.21666537.1668811 Dar Halabia Hotel, Bab Antakya (Inside the old souk), ☏ +963 933 100 068.    (updated Jul 2018)

## Splurge
36.21288437.1491032 Park Hotel, Baghdad Station St, ☏ +963 21 223 3283, fax: +963 21 2233250, info@parkhotelsyria.com. Located in the middle of the city centre. Ten minutes walk to the city centre, and 5 minutes by car to the old souks. Free WiFi internet access in all around the hotel with high speed line. Laundry and pressing service. Airport pick-up and drop-off service.    (updated Jan 2018)
36.20475737.1540563 Sheraton Hotel Aleppo, Al Khandaq St, ☏ +963 21 212 1111. Reopened in 2018, this is the most luxurious hotel available in Aleppo. Despite its name, the hotel is not part of the Sheraton hotel chain.      (updated Sep 2018)
36.20502337.1499044 Baron Hotel (Corner of Baron St and Yarmouk St). A colonial throwback - the hotel opened in 1909 - whose former guests include Agatha Christie (who wrote much of Murder on the Orient Express here), T.E. Lawrence (Lawrence of Arabia), Ataturk and Teddy Roosevelt. During latter years the hotel developed the charm of a place that had seen better days. Residents and visitors alike also took the effort to pop into the bar to have a drink and marvel a showpiece at a bygone era. Bombarded during the civil war and forced to close in 2014, it is as of 2017 unclear if and when this historic hotel will reopen.      (updated Oct 2017)
Beit Wakil (from Jdeideh Square, walk down the street into the old city and turn right at the first alley, called Sissi St), ☏ +963 21 2117083, fax: +963 21 2117082, betwakil@scs-net.org. A great small boutique hotel in the Christian quarter. Renovated old building with a nice courtyard. The restaurant is very good but a bit touristy. Doubles US$121.
Ramsis Hotel, ☏ +963 21 2111102, fax: +963 21 2216700, info@ramsishotel.com. Very centrally located close to the citadel and old Christian quarter, one minute away from the museum. A three-star, deluxe hotel. Very comfortable and well-furnished 28 rooms and 8 suites, a street side cafeteria (Down Town Cafe), an open terrace restaurant (The Green Roof), a gift shop, a news-stand and internet access.

## Connect
An internet access in the old town and near the main attractions (the Citadel, the Souq and the Grand Mosque) can be found at Tara Cafe. It is located in the underground lair of the caravansary of the Adlliyah Mosque and provides standard rates for internet access. It is not an internet cafe, but rather a cafe that provides internet access as a service on laptops that can be rented by the hour.
The Friends Cafe Net is also located in the area of the Citadel. From the entrance to the Citadel, walk straight (south) to a block with shawarma & chicken outlets on the ground floor. The cafe is just behind the block in a small street called "Jnenyt al-Fariq(1)". From the outlets, follow the street to your right, turn left then immediately right.
The closest internet cafe to most of the budget hotels, in the Bab al-Faraj area, is the Concord, which is in an ice cream parlor and cafe by the same name. It charges an outrageous rate for Aleppo and Syria and general.
The other internet cafe within walking distance is at Adam Cafe, across the street from the Baron Hotel. Nevertheless, the internet cafe is in the bottom story of an all-male tea house which may make female customers feel uncomfortable. If you wander around the new Christian quarter of al-Aziziyeh you can find many internet cafes such as Area 51, Montana and Kool Net which offer high speed access. All of the aforementioned cafes provide discount cards for chunks of time.

## Stay safe
Many buildings in the city, particularly in the Salaheddin neighborhood and surrounding areas, have been damaged severely by the civil war. Buildings can and do collapse, often with deadly consequences. Stay away from buildings that have sustained heavy damage or look structurally unstable.

## Go next
Damascus



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
CITADEL OF ALEPPO
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: fortress
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:28:31


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,294
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citadel_of_Aleppo
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Citadel of Aleppo (Arabic: قلعة حلب, romanized: Qalʿat Ḥalab) is a large medieval fortified palace in the centre of the old city of Aleppo, northern Syria. It is considered to be one of the oldest and largest castles in the world. Usage of the Citadel hill dates back at least to the middle of the 3rd millennium BC. Occupied by many civilizations over time – including the Arameans, Assyrians, Greeks, Arabs, Armenians, Romans, Byzantines, Ayyubids, Mamluks and Ottomans  – the majority of the construction as it stands today is thought to originate from the Ayyubid period. An extensive conservation work took place in the 2000s by the Aga Khan Trust for Culture, in collaboration with Aleppo Archeological Society. Dominating the city, the Citadel is part of the Ancient City of Aleppo, a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1986. During the 2010s, the Citadel received significant damage during the lengthy Battle of Aleppo. It was reopened to the public in early 2018 with repairs to damaged parts underway, though some of the damage will be purposefully preserved as part of the history of the citadel. The citadel was damaged by the 2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake.

History
The recently discovered temple of the ancient storm-god Hadad dates use of the hill to the middle of the 3rd millennium BC, as referenced in cuneiform texts from Ebla and Mari. The city became the capital of Yamhad and was known as the "City of Hadad". The temple remained in use from the 24th century BC to at least the 9th century BC, as evidenced by reliefs discovered at it during excavations by German archaeologist Kay Kohlmeyer.
After the decline of the Neo-Hittite Empire centered in Aleppo, the Neo-Assyrian Empire ruled the area (8th–7th century BC), followed by the Neo-Babylonian Empire and the Achaemenid Empire (539–333 BC).

Seleucid period
After Aleppo was conquered by the armies of Alexander the Great, the area was ruled by Seleucus I Nicator, who undertook the revival of the city under the name Beroia. Medieval Arab historians say that the history of the citadel as a fortified acropolis began under Seleucus I Nicator. In some areas of the citadel there are up to two meters of remains of Hellenistic settlement. A colonnaded street led up to the citadel hill from the west, where the south area of Aleppo still retains the Hellenistic grid street plan.

Roman and Byzantine periods
After the Romans destroyed the Seleucid dynasty in 64 BC, the citadel hill continued to have religious significance. Emperor Julian, in his visit in 363 to Aleppo noted "I stayed there for a day, visited the acropolis, offered a white bull to Zeus according to imperial customs, and held a short talk with the town council about worshiping the deities." Very few physical remains have been found from the Roman age in the Citadel.
The Roman Empire was divided into two parts in 395. Aleppo was in the eastern half, Byzantine Empire. During the clashes with the Sassanian king Khosrow II in the 7th century, the population of Aleppo is said to have taken refuge in the Citadel because the city wall was in a deplorable state. Currently, very few remains from the Byzantine period have been found on the Citadel Hill, although the two mosques inside the Citadel are known to be converted from churches originally built by the Byzantines.

Early Islamic period
Aleppo was captured by the Arab armies in 636, during the Muslim conquest of the Levant. Written sources document repairs being made on the citadel after a major earthquake. Little is known about the citadel in the period of early Christianity and Islam, except that Aleppo was a frontier town on the edges of the Byzantine, Umayyad and Abbasid empires.
Sayf al-Dawla, a Hamdanid prince, conquered the city in 944, and it subsequently rose to a political and economic renaissance. The Hamdanids built a reputedly splendid palace on the banks of the river, but moved to the Citadel after Byzantine troops sacked the city in 962. A period of instability followed Hamdanid rule, marked by Byzantine and Bedouin attacks, as well as a short-term rule by the Egypt-based Fatimids. The Mirdasids were said to have converted the two churches into mosques.

Zengid and Ayyubid periods
The citadel rose to the peak of its importance in the period during and after the Crusader presence in the Near East. Zengid ruler Imad ad-Din Zengi – followed by his son Nur ad-Din (ruled 1147–1174) – successfully unified Aleppo and Damascus and held back the Crusaders from their repeated assaults on the cities. Several famous crusaders were imprisoned in the citadel, among them Count of Edessa, Joscelin II, who died there, Raynald of Châtillon, and the King of Jerusalem, Baldwin II, who was held for two years. In addition to his many works in both Aleppo and Damascus, Nur ad-Din rebuilt the Aleppo city walls and fortified the citadel. Arab sources report that he also made several other improvements, such as a high, brick-walled entrance ramp, a palace, and a racecourse likely covered with grass. Nur ad-Din additionally restored or rebuilt the two mosques and donated an elaborate wooden mihrab (prayer niche) to the Mosque of Abraham. The mihrab disappeared during the French Mandate when it was destroyed.
Saladin's son, al-Zahir al-Ghazi, ruled Aleppo from 1193 to 1215. During this time, the citadel went through major reconstruction, fortification and addition of new structures that create the complex of the Citadel in its current form today. Sultan Ghazi strengthened the walls, smoothed the surface of the outcrop and covered sections of the slope at the entrance area with stone cladding. The depth of the moat was increased, connected with water canals and spanned by a tall bridge-cum-viaduct, which today still serves as the entrance into the Citadel. During the first decade of the 13th century, the citadel evolved into a palatial city that included functions ranging from residential (palaces and baths), religious (mosque and shrines), military installations (arsenal, training ground, defence towers and the entrance block) and supporting elements (water cisterns and granaries). The most prominent renovation is the entrance block rebuilt in 1213. Sultan Ghazi also had the two mosques on the Citadel restored, and expanded the city walls to include the southern and eastern suburbs, making the citadel the centre of the fortifications, rather than alongside the wall.

Mongol and Mamluk periods
The citadel was damaged by the Mongol invasion of 1260 and again destroyed by the invasion led by the Turco-Mongol leader Timur which swept through Aleppo in 1400–1401.
In 1415, the Mamluk governor of Aleppo, prince Sayf al-Din, was authorized to rebuild the citadel, which by then stood at the centre of a significant trading city of between 50,000–100,000 inhabitants. Sayf al-Din's additions included two new advance towers on the north and south slopes of the citadel, and the new Mamluk palace built on top of the higher of the two entrance towers. The Ayyubid palace was almost completely abandoned during this period. The Mamluk period also administered restoration and preservation projects on the Citadel. The final Mamluk sultan, al-Ashraf Qansuh al-Ghawri, replaced the flat ceiling of the Throne Hall with nine domes.

Ottoman period
During the Ottoman period, the military role of the citadel as a defense fortress slowly diminished as the city began to grow outside the city walls and was taking its form as a commercial metropolis. The Citadel was still used as a barracks for Ottoman soldiers, although it is not known exactly how many were stationed there. An anonymous Venetian traveler mentions some 2,000 people living in the Citadel in 1556. In 1679, the French consul d’Arvieux reports 1,400 people there, 350 of whom were Janissaries, the elite military corps in the service of the Ottoman Empire. Sultan Süleyman ordered a restoration of the citadel in 1521.
Aleppo and the citadel were heavily damaged in the earthquake of 1822. After the earthquake only soldiers lived in the citadel. The Ottoman Governor of the time, Ibrahim Pasha, used stones from destroyed buildings in the citadel to build a barracks in the north of the crown. It was later restored under the rule of Sultan Abdülmecid in 1850–1851. A windmill, also on the northern edge of the crown, was probably built around the same time.

French Mandate
Soldiers continued to be stationed in the citadel during the French Mandate (1920–1945). The French began archaeological excavations and extensive restoration work in the 1930s, particularly on the perimeter wall. The Mamluk Throne Hall was also completely restored during this time and given a new flat roof decorated in 19th-century Damascene style. A modern amphitheater was constructed on a section of an unexcavated surface of the citadel in 1980 to hold events and concerts.

Modern day
The citadel in its present form is on a mound, which has an elliptical base with a length of 450 metres (1,480 feet) and width of 325 metres (1,066 feet). At the top this ellipse measures 285 metres (935 feet) by 160 metres (520 feet) with the height of this slanting foundation measuring 50 metres (160 feet). In the past, the entire mound was covered with large blocks of gleaming limestone, some of which still remain today.
The mound is surrounded by a 22-metre-deep (72-foot) and 30-metre-wide (98-foot) moat, dating from the 12th century. Notable is the fortified gateway, accessible though an arched bridge. This feature was an addition from the Mamluk government in the 16th century. A succession of five right-angle turns and three large gates (with carved figures) leads to the main inner castle entrance. In the interior of the Citadel, are the Weapons' Hall, the Byzantine Hall and the Throne Hall, with a restored decorated ceiling. Prior to the Syrian civil war, the citadel was a tourist attraction and a site of archaeological digs and studies. The amphitheater was often used for musical concerts or cultural events.

Civil war
In August 2012, during the Battle of Aleppo of the Syrian Civil War, the external gate of the citadel was damaged after being shelled during a clash between the Free Syrian Army and the Syrian Army to gain control over the citadel. In July 2015, a bomb was set off in a tunnel under one of the outer walls causing further damage to the citadel, in an attempt for the Free Syrian Army to dislodge the Syrian Army. During the conflict, the Syrian Army used the Citadel as a military base, and according to the opposition fighters, with the walls acting as cover while shelling surrounding areas and ancient arrow slits in walls being used by snipers to target rebels. As a result of this contemporary usage, the Citadel has received significant damage.
The citadel was extensively damaged by the magnitude 7.8 2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake on 6 February 2023. On 17 February 2024, the Citadel of Aleppo was reopened after the completion of the first and second phase of the restoration of southern forward tower (the entrance to the citadel), which was greatly affected by the earthquake. Also other phases of the citadel's restoration have been revealed, including the entrance, the minaret of Great Ayyubid Mosque, and the façade of Throne Hall.
Tahrir al-Sham and other rebel forces captured the citadel on 29 November 2024, as part of the Second Battle of Aleppo.

Internal sites
There are many structural remains inside the citadel. Notable sites include:

Entrance block
The enormous stone bridge constructed by Sultan Ghazi over the moat led to an imposing bent entrance complex. Would-be assailants to the castle would have to take over six turns up a vaulted entrance ramp, over which were machicolations for pouring hot liquids on attackers from the mezzanine above. Secret passageways wind through the complex, and the main passages are decorated with figurative reliefs. The Ayyubid block is topped by the Mamluk "Throne Hall", a hall where Mamluk sultans entertained large audiences and held official functions.

Ayyubid Palace and Hammam
Ghazi's "palace of glory" burned down on his wedding night and he escaped with the queen, but it was later rebuilt and today stands as one of the most important and impressive monuments in the citadel crown. The Ayyubids were not the first to build a palace on the citadel. Today, numerous architectural details remain from the Ayyubid period, including an entrance portal with muqarnas, or honeycomb vaulting, and a courtyard on the four-iwan layout, with tiling.
Laid out in traditional medieval Islamic style, the palace hammam has three sections. The first was used for dressing, undressing, and resting. The second was an unheated but warmer room, and this was followed by a hot room, and a steam room equipped with alcoves. Hot and cold water was piped through to the hammam with earthenware pipes.

Satura, Hellenistic Well, and underground passages
The construction in the citadel was not confined to above-ground. Several wells penetrate down to 125 m (410 ft) below the surface of the crown. Underground passageways connect to the advance towers and possibly under the moat to the city.

See also
List of castles in Syria

References
Sources
Julia Gonella, Wahid Khayyata, Kay Kohlmeyer: Die Zitadelle von Aleppo und der Tempel des Wettergottes. Rhema-Verlag, Münster 2005, ISBN 978-3-930454-44-0.
Gonnella, Julia (2008), The Citadel of Aleppo: Description, History, Site Plan and Visitor Tour (Guidebook), Aga Khan Trust for Culture and the Syrian Directorate-General of Antiquities and Museums, ISBN 978-2-940212-02-6, archived from the original on 9 June 2012.
Bianca, Stefano (2007), Syria: Medieval Citadels Between East and West, Aga Khan Trust for Culture, ISBN 978-2-940212-02-6, archived from the original on 4 June 2011, retrieved 24 July 2009.

External links

Syrian Ministry of Tourism Archived 2019-11-16 at the Wayback Machine, Arabic section
Historic Cities Support Programme, Aga Khan Trust for Culture
Extensive photo site about the citadel



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
GREAT MOSQUE OF ALEPPO
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: religious_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:28:38


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,701
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Mosque_of_Aleppo
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Great Mosque of Aleppo (Arabic: جَامِع حَلَب ٱلْكَبِيْر, romanized: Jāmiʿ Ḥalab al-Kabīr), also known as the Great Umayyad Mosque of Aleppo (Arabic: ٱلْجَامِع ٱلْأُمَوِي ٱلْكَبِيْر فِي حَلَب, romanized: Al-Jāmiʿ al-Umawī al-Kabīr fī Ḥalab), was the largest and one of the oldest mosques in the city of Aleppo, Syria, first built during the Umayyad Caliphate. The former mosque, now in partial ruins, is located in the al-Jalloum district of the Ancient City of Aleppo, a World Heritage Site, near the entrance to Al-Madina Souq. The mosque was purportedly home to the remains of Zechariah, the father of John the Baptist, both of whom are revered in Islam and Christianity. It was built in the beginning of the 8th century CE by the Muslim Arabs; and the current building dates from the 11th through 14th centuries. 
The minaret in the mosque, built in 1090, was destroyed during fighting in the Syrian Civil War in April 2013. Between 2012 and 2016, the structure of the mosque sustained significant damage, including the collapse of parts of its walls, the burning of its prayer hall, and the loss of priceless historical artefacts. Work commenced in c. 2017 to restore the mosque and its minaret. The West Asia Post reported in 2024 that the mosque had been partially reopened; although other reports in late 2024 claimed that the mosque was still undergoing repairs. The mosque was partially reopened in 2025.

History
Founding
The site of the Great Mosque was once the agora of the Hellenistic period, which later became the garden for the Cathedral of Saint Helena during the Christian era of Roman rule in Syria.
The mosque was built on land that formerly was used as the Cathedral cemetery. The church itself was left and the area became a sacred place for both religions. According to later traditions, the construction of the earliest mosque on the site was commenced by the Umayyad caliph Al-Walid I in 715 and was finished by his successor Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik in 717. Architectural historian K. A. C. Creswell has attributed its construction solely to the latter, quoting 13th century Aleppine historian Ibn al-Adim who wrote Sulayman's intent was "to make it equal to the work of his brother al-Walid in the Great Mosque at Damascus". Another tradition claims al-Walid founded the mosque using materials from the so-called "Church of Cyrrus".
However, architectural historian Jere L. Bacharach noted that the most likely patron of the mosque was Maslamah ibn Abd al-Malik, a brother of al-Walid and Sulayman who was the governor of the local province (Jund Qinnasrin) sometime prior to 710 until at least the early period of Sulayman's rule. Accordingly, this would explain the belief that the mosque's construction took place during the reign of both caliphs. Moreover, Maslamah's governorship of Qinnasrin was largely ignored by the early Arabic historians, who focused their attention on his campaigns against the Byzantine Empire and the Armenians, and his governorship over the provinces of Iraq, Iranian Azerbaijan, Upper Mesopotamia and Armenia. Bacharach further states that Maslamah's commissioning of a large congregational mosque in Aleppo, a major base from which to attack the Byzantines, would have "been appropriate, if not necessary".

Renovation
In the second half of the 11th century, the Mirdasids controlled Aleppo and built a single-domed fountain in the mosque's courtyard. At the northwest corner of the mosque, the 45-meter high minaret was built by the Shia Muslim qadi ("chief Islamic judge") of Aleppo, Abu'l Hasan Muhammad in 1090, during the reign of Seljuk governor Aq Sunqur al-Hajib. Its construction was finished in 1094 during Tutush's rule. The architect of the project was Hasan ibn Mufarraj al-Sarmini.

The mosque was restored and expanded by the Zengid sultan Nur al-Din in 1159 after a great fire that had destroyed the earlier Umayyad structure; In 1260, the mosque was razed by the Mongols. In 1281, the mosque was burned again by the Mongols, and the minbar was taken by the Armenians of Sis, according to Al-Mufaddal.
The Mamluks (1260–1516) made repairs and alterations. Carved Kufic and naskhi inscriptions decorated the entire minaret along with alternate bands of stylized ornaments in patterns and muqarnas. Sultan Qalawun replaced the burnt out mihrab (niche indicating the qibla, or direction to Mecca) in 1285. Later, Sultan al-Nasir Muhammad (1293–1341) had the new minbar ("preacher's pulpit") constructed during his reign.
The courtyard and minaret of the mosque were renovated in 2003.

Syrian Civil War
On 13 October 2012 the mosque was seriously damaged during clashes between the armed groups of the Free Syrian Army and the Syrian Army forces. President Bashar al-Assad issued a presidential decree to form a committee to repair the mosque by the end of 2013.
The mosque was seized by rebel forces in early 2013, and, as of April 2013, was within an area of heavy fighting, with government forces stationed 200 meters (660 ft) away.
On the 24th of April, 2013, the minaret of the mosque was reduced to rubble during an exchange of heavy weapons fire between government forces and rebels during the ongoing Syrian civil war. The Syrian Arab News Agency (SANA) reported that members of Jabhat al-Nusra detonated explosives inside the minaret, while opposition activists said that the minaret was destroyed by Syrian Army tank fire as part of an offensive. Countering assertions by the state media of Jabhat al-Nusra's involvement, opposition sources described them as rebels from the Tawhid Brigades who were fighting government forces around the mosque. The opposition's main political bloc, the Syrian National Coalition (SNC), condemned the minaret's destruction, calling it "an indelible disgrace" and "a crime against human civilization". Syrians have begun rebuilding and restoring the site, with some meager international assistance.

Architecture
Courtyard
The Great Mosque contains a number of architectural similarities to the Great Mosque of Damascus, including a hypostyle plan with large marbled courtyard surrounded by porticoes. The vast courtyard connects to different areas of the mosque, positioned behind the colonnaded arcade. The courtyard is well known for its alternating black and white stone floor that forms intricate geometric arrangements. Two ablutions fountains, both of which are roofed. The courtyard also has an open prayer estrade and a sundial.

Interior
The ḥaram ("sanctuary") consists of the main prayer hall to the courtyard's south, which contains the primary elements of the mosque: the shrine of Zechariah, a 15th-century minbar ("pulpit"), and an elaborately carved miḥrāb ("niche"). Although the central entrance contains an inscription attributing its construction to Ottoman sultan Murad III, it was built by the Mamluks. The hall has three naves, all lined with 18 quadrangular columns with cross-vaults. This large prayer hall originally had a basic straight rooftop with a central qubbah (dome, but during Mamluk rule was replaced with an intricate cross-vaulted system with arches and a small dome over the arcades. The mihrab is deep and round and Zechariah's supposed tomb is to its left along the southern wall.
There are three other halls that abut the remaining sides of the courtyard. The eastern and northern halls each have two naves, while the western hall has one. The latter is mostly of modern construction. The east hall dates to the period of Malik Shah (1072–92) and the north hall was renovated during Mamluk sultan Barquq's reign (1382–1399), but largely maintained its original 11th century character.

Minaret
The minaret's shaft, which protruded out of the flat roof of one of the halls, consisted of five levels with a crowning top encircled with a veranda. A muqarnas-style cornice divided the veranda top from the shaft. The structure was largely built of fine ashlar. The minaret was heavily decorated in relief ornament, more so than any other Islamic-era structure in Aleppo with the exception of the Shu'aybiyah Madrasa. Its stories contained cusped arches and continuous mouldings. The masonry of the minaret varied throughout, with a mix of light and heavy usage of toothed tools, short, long, vertical and horizontal strokes, fine and rough finishes, and small and large stones.
According to E.J. Brill's First Encyclopaedia of Islam, the minaret was "quite unique in the whole of Muslim architecture". Archaeologist Ernst Herzfeld described the architectural style of the minaret as being "the product of Mediterranean civilization," writing that its four facades carried elements of Gothic architecture. Meanwhile, anthropologist Yasser Tabbaa stated the mosque was a continuation of the ancient North Syrian churches and "an entirely localized phenomenon, centered mainly in the region between Aleppo and Edessa".

Maqsurah
The Great Mosque has a small museum annexed to it containing a number of ancient manuscripts. Similar to the Great Mosque of Damascus, a maqsurah was built in the form of a square domed room raised by one step above the floor level of the prayer hall, and adorned with Kashan tiles that cover all the internal surfaces of its walls. A large arched gate supported by two robust columns and topped with capitals as well as a bronze door screen comprise the entranceways to the maqsurah. The tomb containing the remains of the Prophet Zakariah, decorated with silver embroideries containing Quranic verses from the chapter of Mariyam, was located in the center of the room. The museum's number of valuable objects, including a box purportedly containing a strand of the Prophet Muhammad's hair, were subject to looting during the Syrian War in the 2013 clash. However, rebels claimed they had instead salvaged ancient handwritten Koranic manuscripts and hidden them.

See also
Citadel of Aleppo
Sunni Islam in Syria
List of mosques in Syria
List of heritage sites damaged during the Syrian civil war
Religious significance of the Syrian region
Umayyad Mosque

Notes
References
Bibliography
External links

"Great Mosque of Aleppo". YouTube.
"Photo of damage". Facebook: Le patrimoine archéologique syrien en danger. Archived from the original on January 30, 2013.
"Another photo of damage from the same site". Archived from the original on February 1, 2013.
"Another photo of damage from the same site". Archived from the original on February 1, 2013.
"Another photo of damage from the same site". Archived from the original on February 1, 2013.
"Another photo of damage from the same site".
Weeks, Jonny (April 25, 2013). "Syria: Aleppo's Umayyad mosque destroyed - in pictures". The Guardian. Retrieved August 23, 2025.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 2,200
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%AC%D8%A7%D9%85%D8%B9_%D8%AD%D9%84%D8%A8_%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%83%D8%A8%D9%8A%D8%B1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

جَامِعُ حَلَب الكَبير أو الجامع الأموي في حلب أو جامع بني أمية الكبير في حلب هو أحد أكبر وأقدم المساجد في مدينة حلب السورية، حيث يقع المسجد في حي الجلوم في المدينة القديمة من حلب، التي أدرجت على قائمة مواقع التراث العالمي عام 1986، حيث أصبح الجامع جزءاً من التراث العالمي، وهو يقع بالقرب من سوق المدينة. كما يُعرف الجامع أيضاً بوجود ما بقي من جسد النبي زكريا والد النبي يحيى (أو يوحنا المعمدان كما يطلق عليه في المسيحية). يقوم الجامع اليوم على مساحة من الأرض يبلغ طولها 105 أمتار من الشرق إلى الغرب، ويبلغ عرضه نحو 77.75 متر من الجنوب إلى الشمال وهو يشبه إلى حد كبير في مخططه وطرازه الجامع الأموي الكبير بدمشق. كما وبني المسجد في القرن الثامن الميلادي، إلا أن الشكل الحالي يعود إلى القرن الحادي عشر الميلادي حتى القرن الرابع عشر الميلادي، كما وبنيت المئذنة في عام 1090 ميلادي، ودمرت في نيسان من العام 2013 نتيجة للمعارك التي اندلعت هناك في أحداث الأزمة السورية.

التاريخ
التأسيس
كان الجامع الكبير ذات مرة أغورا (و كلمة أغورا تعني ساحة دائرية وتعتبر بمثابة مركز الحياة الرياضية والسياسية والروحية في المدينة) في العهد الهلنستي، حيث أصبح فيما بعد حديقة لكاتدرائية سانت هيلينا خلال الحقبة المسيحية من الحكم الروماني في سوريا.
تم بناء المسجد على الأراضي المصادرة والتي كانت مقبرة كاتدرائية. وحسب التقاليد في وقت لاحق، بدأ بناء أول مسجد في ذلك الموقع في عهد الخليفة الأموي الوليد بن عبد الملك في عام 715 ميلادي وتم الانتهاء من بنائه في عام 717 ميلادي في عهد الخليفة سليمان بن عبد الملك. بينما يعزو المؤرخ المعماري كريزويل بنائه للخليفة سليمان بن عبد الملك فقط، مستشهداً بالمؤرخ الحلبي ابن العديم الذي كتب في القرن الثالث عشر الميلادي عن نيّة سليمان بأن يجعل الجامع "مساوياً لعمل شقيقه الوليد في جامع بني أمية الكبير في دمشق". بينما يوجد أقوال تفيد بأن الوليد قام ببناء المسجد بحجارة كنيسة سيروس (Church of Cyrrus)."
على كل حال، فإن المؤرخ المعماري ججيري باشاش (Jere L. Bacharach) رجّح بأن يكون راعي المسجد كان مسلمة بن عبد الملك شقيق الوليد بن عبد الملك و‌سليمان بن عبد الملك، حيث شغل مسلمة منصب حاكم جند قنسرين قبيل عام 710 ميلادي حتى بداية فترة حكم سليمان. وهذا تفسير الاعتقاد بأن المسجد بني في عهد كلٍ من الخليفتين الوليد بن عبد الملك و‌سليمان بن عبد الملك. علاوة على ذلك فقد تم تجاهل حكم مسلمة بن عبد الملك لجند قنسرين من قبل المؤرخين العرب الأوائل، حيث أنهم ركّزوا اهتماماتهم على حملاته ضد الإمبراطورية البيزنطية و‌الأرمن، وركزوا أيضاً على حكمه لمناطق العراق و‌أذربيجان وأعالي بلاد ما بين النهرينو‌أرمينيا، وقد أشار المؤرخ المعماري ججيري باشاش على أن تكليف مسلمة بن عبد الملك ببناء جامع كبير في حلب والتي تعتبر قاعدة رئيسية لمهاجمة البيزنطيين قد «كان من المناسب، إن لم يكن من الضروري».

التجديد
في النصف الثاني من القرن الحادي عشر ميلادي، سيطر المرداسيون على حلب وقاموا ببناء النافورة المقببة (ذات القبة) في باحة المسجد. في الركن الشمالي الغربي بنى القاضي (رئيس المحكمة الإسلامية في حلب) أبي الحسن محمد المئذنة بارتفاع 45 متراً في عام 1090 ميلادي  خلال عهد الحاكم السلجوقي آق سنقر الحاجب وتم الانتهاء من بنائها في عام 1094 ميلادي خلال فترة حكم السلطان السلجوقي تتش بن ألب أرسلان. وكان المهندس المعماري للمشروع حسن بن مفرج آل سرميني.

قام السلطان الزنكي نور الدين زنكي بترميم المسجد في عام 1159 ميلادي بعد حريق كبير دمّر المسجد في وقت سابق ;، إلا أن المسجد هُدِمَ في عام 1260 على المغول.

قام المماليك (1260-1516) بالقيام بعدة إصلاحات وإدخال العديد من التعديلات على المسجد، حيث زينت منحوتات كوفية ونقوش المئذنة بأكملها بدلاً من الزخارف التقليدية في النمط والمقرصنات. قام السلطان المملوكي المنصور قلاوون باستبدال المنبر المحترق في عام 1285 ميلادي، وفي وقت لاحق قام السلطان الناصر محمد بن قلاوون قام بوضع المنبر الحالي الذي بني خلال فترة حكمه.

كما تم ترميم صحن المسجد (فناء المسجد) ومئذنته في عام 2003.

الحرب الأهلية السورية
تأثر الجامع بالمعارك الدائرة في حلب خلال الحرب الأهلية السورية سنة 2013 وتعرضت مكتبته التاريخية للحرق نتيجة للمعارك الدائرة حول محيطه. كما انهارت مئذنته التاريخية في 24 نيسان 2013 وسط اتهامات بين المعارضة والنظام. في يوم 13 أكتوبر 2012 لحقت أضرار جسيمة في المسجد جراء اشتباكات عنيفة دارت بين مسلحي المعارضة وقوات الجيش السوري. وقام الرئيس السوري بشار الأسد بإصدار مرسوم بتكليف لجنة لإصلاح المسجد بحلول نهاية عام 2013.

كما قام مسلحو المعارضة ببسط سيطرتهم على المسجد للمرة الثانية في أوائل عام 2013، ومنذ أبريل من العام 2013 اُعتبر المسجد من أحد مناطق الاشتباكات بين مسلحي المعارضة وقوات الجيش السوري المتمركزة على بعد 200 متر (660 قدم).

في 24 أبريل انهارت مئذنة المسجد حيث استحالت المئذنة ركاماً خلال اشتباك بالأسلحة الثقيلة بين قوات الجيش السوري والمعارضة خلال أحداث معركة حلب وهي المعركة التي دارت في مدينة حلب شمال سوريا بهدف إحكام السيطرة على المدينة. كما وذكرت وكالة الأنباء السورية - سانا أنا عناصر من جبهة النصرة فجّروا عبوة ناسفة داخل المئذنة، في حين قال نشطاء من المعارضة أن المئذنة قد دُمرَت بقذيفة دبابة تابعة للجيش السوري في إطار هجومٍ كان قد شنّه الأخير للسيطرة على المسجد.، ونقل بعض الناشطين نقلاً عن مسلحي المعارضة اتهامهم الجيش السوري بتفخيخ الجامع بالألغام لدى انسحابه، وقد قالوا أيضاً بأنهم استطاعوا تفكيك جميع الألغام عدا التي كانت في المسجد عدا التي كانت في الرواق الشمالي والمئذنة بسبب كونها في الجهة الشمالية من المسجد وهي الجهة التي تطل على دوار السبع بحرات الذي لا يبعد أكثر من ثلاثمئة متر عن المسجد وحيث تتمركز قناصة قوات الجيش السوري بالمباني المحيطة بالدوار، وقد أوضح أحد المسلحين المعارضين أن القناصة المطلون على المسجد كانوا قد كثفوا ضرباتهم على ساحة المسجد بغية إعاقة تحركات الثوار المسيطرين على المسجد من جهة ومن جهة محاولة إعادة السيطرة عليه والتي تترافق باشتباكات عنيفة من قبل قوات النظام التي تحاول التقدم نحو المسجد. في حين قال المرصد السوري أنه «من الممكن أن تكون المئذنة انهارت من تلقاء نفسها بسبب آثار المعارك العنيفة خلال الأشهر الماضية». كما وأن مصادر المعارضة ردت على وسائل الإعلام الحكومية بشأن انتماء المقاتلين المتمركزين في المسجد حيث وصفتهم المعارضة بأنهم مقاتلون تابعون للواء التوحيد في حين قالت وسائل الإعلام الرسمية بأنهم تابعون لجبهة النصرة. أدانت المعارضة وخصوصاً الائتلاف الوطني المعارض (الائتلاف الوطني لقوى الثورة والمعارضة السورية) تدمير المئذنة، واصفةُ إياه بأنه «عار الذي لا يمحى» و«جريمة ضد الحضارة الإنسانية».

الطراز المعماري
الأبواب
الباب الشمالي، يقع إلى جوار المئذنة.
الباب الغربي، ينفذ إلى شارع المساميرية.
الباب الشرقي، وينفذ إلى سوق المناديل.
الباب الجنوبي، ينفذ إلى سوق النحاسين.

فناء المسجد
الفناء محاط بثلاثة أروقة إلى جميع الجهات باستثناء الجهة الجنوبية التي يكون فيها الحرم مباشرة ملاصقاً لفناء المسجد
تم بناء المسجد حول فناء كبير يربط مناطق مختلفة من المسجد، حيث أن هذه المناطق تقع خلف الممرات المزودة بأعمدة. أرضية الفناء الحجرية والمعروفة بتناوب اللونين الأبيض والأسود تشتهر بالتشكيلات الهندسية المعقدة والتي يشكلها تناوب اللونين الأبيض والأسود.وتعود إلى العصر العثماني وقد جددت مؤخراً. وتنفتح على الصحن عقود عشرة من الجانبين وستة عشر عقداً في الشمال ومثلها في الجنوب ويشتهر الفناء بوجود نافورتي وضوء مسقوفتان. كما ويوجد مزولة في فناء المسجد.

داخل المسجد
الحرم و الذي يتكون من المصلى إلى الجهة الجنوبية من الفناء،  ويحوي هذا المصلى ضريح زكريا، ومنبر يعود للقرن الخامس عشر الميلادي، و المحراب المنحوت بشكل متقن. وعلى الرغم من أن الباب المركزي يحتوي على نقش ينسب بناء المصلى للسلطان العثماني مراد الثالث، إلا أن المصلى كان قد بني على يد المماليك. يوجد في المصلى ثلاثة صحون (و الصحن هنا هو المسافة بين صفين من الأعمدة) حيث يوجد 18 عموداً مربع قائم الزاوية في كل صف بالإضافة إلى سقف نصفي برميلين متعامدين (حيث يتقاطع نصفي برميلين بشكل متعامد ليكونا السقف). كان المصلى في السابق ذو سقف مستقيم مع سطح القبة المركزية، لكن خلال حكم المماليك اُستعيض عن هذا النمط بنظام قبب معقد (تقاطع نصفي برميلين بشكل متعامد) مع قناطر للأروقة بالإضافة إلى قبة صغيرة فوق الأروقة. أما مقام زكريا المزعوم فهو إلى اليسار من المحراب وبطول الجدار الجنوبي.

هناك ثلاثة قاعات أُخرى متاخمة للأروقة الثلاثة الأخرى. في القاعة الشمالية والشرقية يوجد صحنان (و الصحن هنا هو المسافة بين صفين من الأعمدة)، أما في القاعة الغربية يوجد صحن واحد، وعلى الأغلب فإن بناء القاعة الغربية يعود إلى العصر الحديث. أما القاعة الشرقية فيعود تاريخها إلى فترة حكم السلطان السلجوقي جلال الدولة ملك شاه (1072-1092) والقاعة الشمالية قد تم تجديدها في عهد السلطان المملوكي الظاهر سيف الدين برقوق (1382-1399)، ولكن إلى حد كبير مازالت محافظةً على طابعها منذ القرن الحادي عشر الميلادي.

المئذنة
ليست المئذنة الأساسية بل مئذنة جديدة بنيت على مراحل منذ عهد الأمير سابق بن محمود بن مرداس عام 472 هـ حتى عهد السلطان تتش بن ألب أرسلان. والمئذنة مربعة المسقط يبلغ ارتفاعها نحو خمسة وأربعين متراً (45 م)حتى شرفة المؤذن، أما طول ضلعها فيبلغ نحو 4,95 يرتفع جسم المئذنة من سطح قاعة الصلاة الشمالية ، كما وتتألف المئذنة من خمس مستويات متوجة بقمة لها شرفة. تبرز بعض العناصر المعمارية في الشرفة الموجودة في أعلى المئذنة مثل المقرنصات والحافة المتقدمة (Cornice)، تم بناء المئذنة إلى حد كبير بالحجارة المصقولة. وزخرفت المئذنة بنقوش بارزة أكثر من أي مبنى يعود إلى الحقبة الإسلامية في حلب باستثناء المدرسة الشعيبيية.

وفقاً لدائرة المعارف الإسلامية الإصدار الأول (E.J. Brill's First Encyclopaedia of Islam)فإن المئذنة «فريدة من نوعها في عموم العمارة الإسلامية».

يصف عالم الآثار المستشرق الألماني إرنست هرتسفلد أسلوب عمارة المئذنة بأنه «نتاج حضارة البحر المتوسط».
الكتابات التي تغطي أوجه المئذنة الأربعة تحمل عناصر العمارة القوطية.

وصف ابن جبير للجامع
إن وصف ابن جبير في رحلته في حلب، لهذا الجامع الذي زاره سنة (580 هـ / 1183 م) يبين حالة المسجد قبل حريقه مع الأسواق سنة (564 هـ / 1168 م) وترميمه من نور الدين زنكي فيقول: "إنه من أحسن الجوامع وأجملها في كافة البلاد الإسلامية، قد أطاف بصحنه الواسع بلاط كبير متسع مفتح كله أبواباً قصرية الحسن إلى الصحن، عددها ينيف على الخمسين، والبلاط القبلي الحرم لا مقصورة فيه فجاء ظاهر الاتساع". ثم يصف المحراب والمنبر وزخارفهما فيقول "ما أرى في بلدٍ من البلاد منبراً على شكله وغرابة صنعته، واتصلت الصنعة الخشبية منه إلى المحراب فتجللت صفحاته كلها خشباً على تلك الصنعة الغريبة وارتفع كالتاج العظيم على المحراب، وعلا حتى اتصل بسمك السقف وقد قوّس أعلاه.. وهو مرصع كله بالعاج والأبنوس. إن المنبر والمحراب الذي يصفه ابن جبير قد صنع في الوقت الذي أمر فيه نور الدين زنكي بصنع منبر للمسجد الأقصى، نقله فيما بعد صلاح الدين بعد تحرير القدس سنة (583 هـ / 1187 م). ومن المؤكد أن صناع هذا المنبر وهم معالي وأولاده المذكورون على منبر المسجد الأقصى الذي أحرقه الصهاينة سنة 1969، أي أنه يحمل نفس الشكل والزخارف في الجامع الأموي في مدينة حلب، ولقد قام هؤلاء بصنع محراب مدرسة الحلوية على غرار محراب مسجد حلب الذي وصفه ابن جبير. إذ إن ورشة أولاد معالي كانت تعمل في فناء الحلوية المجاور للجامع الكبير في حلب، على أن المنبر الحالي يعود إلى أيام الملك الناصر محمد، والمحراب الحالي يعود إلى عصر السلطان قلاوون، كما سنرى في وصف الجامع كما هو الآن بشكل المتكامل وزخارفه وكل فخامته.

أقسام الجامع الأموي
الأبواب
الباب الشمالي، يقع إلى جوار المئذنة.
الباب الغربي، ينفذ إلى شارع المساميرية.
الباب الشرقي، وينفذ إلى سوق المناديل.
الباب الجنوبي، ينفذ إلى سوق النحاسين.
الصحن
صحن واسع محاط بأروقة ثلاثة، وحرم في الجهة القبلية والصحن مغطى ببلاط رخامي بلونين أصفر وأسود وبتشكيلات هندسية ما زالت تميز هذا الصحن، وتعود إلى العصر العثماني وقد جددت مؤخراً. وتنفتح على الصحن عقود عشرة من الجانبين وستة عشر عقداً في الشمال ومثلها في الجنوب، وفي وسط الصحن مطاهر حديثة مغطاة بقبة.
المئذنة
وهي ليست المئذنة الأساسية بل مئذنة جديدة بنيت على مراحل منذ عهد الأمير سابق بن محمود بن مرداس عام 472 هـ حتى عهد السلطان تتش بن ألب أرسلان. والمئذنة مربعة المسقط يبلغ ارتفاعها نحو خمسة وأربعين متراً (45 م)حتى شرفة المؤذن، أما طول ضلعها فيبلغ نحو 4,95 م
بيت الصلاة
المنبر
المحاريب
 حجرة الخطيب
الحجرة النبوية
الحجازية
حجرة خاصة بالنساء لأداء الصلاة، وسميت بالحجازية لأنها كانت منزل أهل الحجاز.
الأروقة

أهمية الجامع
يذكر أن الجامع الأموي في حلب اكتسب شهرة على مستوى العالم الإسلامي، نظراً لما يحتويه من زخرفة في فن العمارة الإسلامية وطراز عمراني قديم، إضافة إلى كونه عملاً معمارياً اغتنى بإضافات كثيرة على مر العصور التاريخية المتعاقبة، فلا يكاد عصر من العصور التاريخية الإسلامية إلا وله شاهد في المسجد، إضافة إلى ذلك فان القرارات المصيرية المهمة والأحداث التي ارتبطت بالجامع قد أكسبته أهمية خاصة. < بلدنا أون لاين. كما يحتوى الجامع على كنوز هامة، في الحرم سدة من الخشب المزخرف بألوان مختلفة مع كتابة تشير إلى عصر بانيها «قره سنقر كافل حلب» ويعود المنبر إلى عصر الملك الناصر محمد، وصنعه محمد بن علي الموصلي، كما تشير الكتابة عليه، وهو من أجمل المنابر مزخرف بالرقش العربي الهندسي المركب من خشب الأبنوس والمنزل بالعاج والنحاس البراق ويعود المحراب إلى عصر السلطان قلاوون وقد تم بإشراف كافل حلب قره سنقر سنة (681 هـ / 1281 م) وهو مبني بالحجر المشقف بزخارف هندسية رائعة وكما هو الأمر في الجامع الأموي في دمشق، فإن ضريحاً يطلق عليه اسم الحضرة النبوية، ويقال إنه يحوي قبر النبي زكريا، موجود وفيه أشياء ثمينة محفوظة، منها مصاحف شريفة كتبها كبار الخطاطين السوريين والأتراك، وفيها قناديل قديمة مذهبة ومفضضة وقواعد شمعدان ولقد أنشئ هذا الضريح منذ عام (907 هـ / 1500 م) ورمم مراراً، وكانت آخر الترميمات سنة (1030 هـ / 1620 م) وكسيت جدرانه الثلاثة بألواح الخزف القاشاني وأقيم باب الضريح وفوقه قوس من الحجارة بلونين أسود وأبيض، إن أروع ما يحويه هذا المسجد هو مئذنته المربعة المرتفعة خمسين متراً والتي جددت سنة (873 هـ / 1094 م) بديلاً عن مآذن أموية نعتقد أنها كانت أربع مآذن في أركان المسجد، وكانت مربعة ولا شك على غرار جامع أمية الكبير بدمشق والجوامع الأخرى التي أنشئت في عصر الخليفة الأموي الوليد بن عبد الملك.

معرض الصور
انظر أيضًا
قلعة حلب
مدينة حلب القديمة
الجامع الأموي (دمشق)
عمارة أموية

المراجع


== الكتب والمؤلفات ==



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
PALMYRA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:28:47


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 12,195
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palmyra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Palmyra ( pal-MY-rə; Palmyrene Aramaic: 𐡶𐡣𐡬𐡥𐡴‎, romanized: Tadmor; Arabic: تَدْمُر‎, romanized: Tadmur) is an ancient city in central Syria. It is located in the eastern part of the Levant, and archaeological finds date back to the Neolithic period, and documents first mention the city in the early second millennium BCE. Palmyra changed hands on a number of occasions between different empires before becoming a subject of the Roman Empire in the first century CE.
The city grew wealthy from trade caravans; the Palmyrenes became renowned as merchants who established colonies along the Silk Road and operated throughout the Roman Empire. Palmyra's wealth enabled the construction of monumental projects, such as the Great Colonnade, the Temple of Bel, and the distinctive tower tombs. Ethnically, the Palmyrenes combined elements of Amorites, Arameans, and Arabs. Socially structured around kinship and clans, Palmyra's inhabitants spoke Palmyrene Aramaic, a variety of Western Middle Aramaic, while using Koine Greek for commercial and diplomatic purposes. The Hellenistic period of West Asia influenced the culture of Palmyra, which produced distinctive art and architecture that combined different Mediterranean traditions. The city's inhabitants worshiped local Semitic, Mesopotamian, and Arab deities.
By the third century, Palmyra had become a prosperous regional center. It reached the apex of its power in the 260s, when the Palmyrene King Odaenathus defeated the Sasanian emperor Shapur I. The king was succeeded by queen regent Zenobia, who rebelled against Rome and established the Palmyrene Empire. In 273, Roman emperor Aurelian levelled the city, which was later restored by Diocletian at a reduced size. The Palmyrenes converted to Christianity during the fourth century and to Islam in the centuries following the conquest by the seventh-century Rashidun Caliphate, after which the Palmyrene and Greek languages were replaced by Arabic.
Before 273 CE, Palmyra enjoyed autonomy and was attached to the Roman province of Syria, having its political organization influenced by the Greek city-state model during the first two centuries CE. The city became a Roman colonia during the third century, leading to the incorporation of Roman governing institutions, before becoming a monarchy in 260. Following its razing in 273, Palmyra became a minor center under the Byzantines and later empires. Its destruction by the Timurids in 1400 reduced it to a small village. Under French Mandatory rule in 1932, the inhabitants were moved into the new village of Tadmur, and the ancient site became available for excavations. During the Syrian civil war in 2015, the Islamic State captured Palmyra and destroyed large parts of the ancient city, which was recaptured by the Syrian Army on 2 March 2017. It was then recaptured by the Syrian Free Army, after the fall of the Assad government in December 2024.

Etymology
Records of the name "Tadmor" date from the early second millennium BC; 18th-century BC tablets from Mari written in cuneiform record the name as "Ta-ad-mi-ir", while Assyrian inscriptions of the 11th century BC record it as "Ta-ad-mar". Aramaic Palmyrene inscriptions themselves showed two variants of the name; TDMR (i.e., Tadmar) and TDMWR (i.e., Tadmor). The etymology of the name is unclear; the standard interpretation, supported by Albert Schultens, connects it to the Semitic word for "date palm", tamar (תמר‎), thus referring to the palm trees that surrounded the city.
The Greek name Παλμύρα (Latinized Palmyra) was first recorded by Pliny the Elder in the first century AD. It was used throughout the Greco-Roman world. It is generally believed that "Palmyra" derives from "Tadmor" and linguists have presented two possibilities; one view holds that Palmyra was an alteration of Tadmor. According to the suggestion by Schultens, "Palmyra" could have arisen as a corruption of "Tadmor", via an unattested form "Talmura", changed to "Palmura" by the influence of the Latin word palma (date "palm"), in reference to the city's palm trees, then the name reached its final form "Palmyra". The second view, supported by some philologists, such as Jean Starcky, holds that Palmyra is a translation of "Tadmor" (assuming that it meant palm), which had derived from the Greek word for palm, "palame".
An alternative suggestion connects the name to the Syriac tedmurtā (ܬܕܡܘܪܬܐ) "miracle", hence tedmurtā "object of wonder", from the root dmr "to wonder"; this possibility was mentioned favourably by Franz Altheim and Ruth Altheim-Stiehl (1973), but rejected by Jean Starcky (1960) and Michael Gawlikowski (1974). Michael Patrick O'Connor (1988) suggested that the names "Palmyra" and "Tadmor" originated in the Hurrian language. As evidence, he cited the inexplicability of alterations to the theorized roots of both names (represented in the addition of -d- to tamar and -ra- to palame). According to this theory, "Tadmor" derives from the Hurrian word tad ("to love") with the addition of the typical Hurrian mid vowel rising (mVr) formant mar. Similarly, according to this theory, "Palmyra" derives from the Hurrian word pal ("to know") using the same mVr formant (mar).

Region and city layout
The city of Palmyra lies 215 km (134 mi) northeast of the Syrian capital, Damascus; along with an expanded hinterland of several settlements, farms, and forts, the city forms part of the region known as Palmyrena or Palmyrene. The city is located in an oasis surrounded by palms (of which twenty varieties have been reported). Two mountain ranges overlook the city - the northern Palmyrene mountain belt from the north and the southern Palmyrene mountains from the southwest. In the south and the east Palmyra is exposed to the Syrian Desert. A small wadi, al-Qubur, crosses the area, flowing from the western hills past the city before disappearing in the eastern gardens of the oasis. South of the wadi is a spring, Efqa. Pliny the Elder described the town in the 70s AD as famous for its desert location, for the richness of its soil, and for the springs surrounding it, which made agriculture and herding possible.

Layout
Palmyra began as a small Neolithic settlement near the Efqa spring on the southern bank of Wadi al-Qubur. The much later Hellenistic settlement of Palmyra was also located near the Efqa spring on the southern bank of Wadi al-Qubur. It had its residences expanding to the wadi's northern bank during the first century. Although the city's walls at the time of Zenobia originally enclosed an extensive area on both banks of the wadi, the walls rebuilt during Aurelian's reign surrounded only the northern-bank section. Most of the city's monumental projects were built on the wadi's northern bank, among them is the Temple of Bel, on a tell which was the site of an earlier temple (known as the Hellenistic temple). However, excavation supports the theory that the tell was originally located on the southern bank, and the wadi was diverted south of the tell to incorporate the temple into Palmyra's late first and early second century urban organization on the north bank.
Also north of the wadi was the Great Colonnade, Palmyra's 1.1-kilometre-long (0.68 mi) main street, which extended from the Temple of Bel in the east, to the Funerary Temple no.86 in the city's western part. It had a monumental arch in its eastern section, and a tetrapylon stands in the center. The Baths of Diocletian were on the left side of the colonnade. Nearby were residences, the Temple of Baalshamin, and the Byzantine churches, which include "Basilica IV", Palmyra's largest church. The church is dated to the Justinian age, its columns are estimated to be 7 metres (23 ft) high, and its base measured 27.5 by 47.5 metres (90 by 156 ft).
The Temple of Nabu and the Roman theater were built on the colonnade's southern side. Behind the theater were a small senate building and the large agora, with the remains of a triclinium (banquet room) and the Tariff Court. A cross street at the western end of the colonnade leads to the Camp of Diocletian, built by Sosianus Hierocles (the Roman governor of Syria in the reign of Diocletian). Nearby are the Temple of Al-lāt and the Damascus Gate.

Demographic history
Bronze and Iron Ages
The earliest known inhabitants were the Amorites in the early second millennium BC, and by the end of the millennium, Arameans were mentioned as inhabiting the area.
Arabs arrived in the city in the late first millennium BC.

Hellenistic to Byzantine periods
Zabdibel, who aided the Seleucids in the battle of Raphia (217 BC), was mentioned as the commander of "the Arabs and neighbouring tribes to the number of ten thousands"; Zabdibel and his men were not actually identified as Palmyrenes in the texts, but the name "Zabdibel" is a Palmyrene name leading to the conclusion that he hailed from Palmyra. The Arab newcomers were assimilated by the earlier inhabitants, used Palmyrene as a mother tongue, and formed a significant segment of the aristocracy.
At its height during the reign of Zenobia (around 270), Palmyra had more than 200,000 residents.
The classical city also had a Jewish community; inscriptions in Palmyrene from the Beit She'arim necropolis in Lower Galilee confirm the burial of Palmyrene Jews.
During the Roman period, occasionally and rarely, members of the Palmyrene families took Greek names while ethnic Greeks were few; the majority of people with Greek names, who did not belong to one of the city's families, were freed slaves. The Palmyrenes seem to have disliked the Greeks, considered them foreigners, and restricted their settlement in the city.

Early Muslim to Late Ottoman periods
During the Umayyad Caliphate, Palmyra was mainly inhabited by the Banu Kalb.
Benjamin of Tudela recorded the existence of 2000 Jews in the city during the twelfth century.
Palmyra declined after its destruction by Timur in 1400, and was a village of 6,000 inhabitants at the beginning of the 20th century.

Ethnicity of classical Palmyra
Palmyra's population was a mixture of the different peoples inhabiting the city, which is seen in Aramaic, Arabic and Amorite names of Palmyrene clans, but the ethnicity of Palmyra is a matter of debate.
Some scholars, such as Andrew M. Smith II, consider ethnicity a concept related to modern nationalism, and prefer not to describe the Palmyrenes with ethnic designations they themselves did not know, concluding that there is a lack of evidence regarding what ethnicity the Palmyrenes perceived themselves. On the other hand, many scholars, such as Eivind Seland, contend that a distinctive Palmyrene ethnicity is apparent in the available contemporary evidence. The second century work De Munitionibus Castrorum mentioned the Palmyrenes as a natio, the Latin equivalent of the Greek ἔθνος (éthnos). Seland noted the epigraphic evidence left by the Palmyrenes outside the city.
The inscriptions reveal the existence of a real diaspora satisfying the three criteria set by the sociologist Rogers Brubaker. Palmyrene diaspora members always made clear their Palmyrene origin and used the Palmyrene language, and maintained their distinct religion even when the host society's religion was close to that of Palmyra. Seland concluded that in the case of Palmyra, the people perceived themselves different from their neighbours and a real Palmyrene ethnicity existed. Aside from the existence of a Palmyrene ethnicity, Aramean or Arab are the two main ethnic designations debated by historians; Javier Teixidor stated, "Palmyra was an Aramaean city and it is a mistake to consider it as an Arab town", while Yasamin Zahran criticized this statement and argued that the inhabitants considered themselves Arabs. In practice, according to several scholars such as Udo Hartmann and Michael Sommer, the citizenry of Palmyra were mainly the result of Arab and Aramaean tribes merging into a unity with a corresponding consciousness; they thought and acted as Palmyrenes.

Language
Until the late third century, Palmyrenes spoke Palmyrene Aramaic and used the Palmyrene alphabet. The use of Latin was minimal, but Greek was used by wealthier members of society for commercial and diplomatic purposes, and it became the dominant language during the Byzantine era. There are several theories explaining the disappearance of the Palmyrene language shortly after the campaigns of Aurelian. The linguist Jean Cantineau assumed that Aurelian suppressed all aspects of Palmyrene culture, including the language, but the last Palmyrene inscription dates to 279/280, after the death of the Roman emperor in 275, thus refuting such a theory. Many scholars ascribe the disappearance of the language to a change in society resulting from the reorganization of the Eastern Roman frontier following the fall of Zenobia. The archaeologist Karol Juchniewicz ascribed it to a change in the ethnic composition of the city, resulting from the influx of people who did not speak Aramaic, probably a Roman legion. Hartmann suggested that it was a Palmyrene initiative by nobles allied to Rome attempting to express their loyalty to the emperor; Hartmann noted that Palmyrene disappeared in the written form, and that this does not mean its extinction as spoken language. After the Arab conquest, Greek was replaced by Arabic, from which, although the city was surrounded by Bedouins, a Palmyrene dialect evolved.

Social organization
Classical Palmyra was a tribal community, but due to the lack of sources, an understanding of the nature of Palmyrene tribal structure is not possible. Thirty clans have been documented; five of which were identified as tribes (Phylai Koine Greek: Φυλαί, pl. of Phyle Φυλή) comprising several sub-clans. By the time of Nero, Palmyra had four tribes, each residing in an area of the city bearing its name. Three of the tribes were the Komare, Mattabol and Ma'zin; the fourth tribe is uncertain, but was probably the Mita. In time, the four tribes became highly civic and tribal lines blurred; by the second century clan identity lost its importance, and it disappeared during the third century. Even the four tribes ceased to be important by the third century as only one inscription mentions a tribe after the year 212; instead, aristocrats played the decisive role in the city's social organization.
Women seem to have been active in Palmyra's social and public life. They commissioned inscriptions, buildings or tombs, and in certain cases, held administrative offices. Offerings to gods in the names of women are documented.
The last Palmyrene inscription of 279/280 refers to the honouring of a citizen by the Maththabolians, which indicates that the tribal system still carried weight after the fall of Zenobia. A noticeable change is the lack of development of aristocratic residences, and no important public buildings were constructed by locals, indicating that the elite diminished following the campaign of Aurelian. The social change and the reduction of the aristocratic elite is hard to explain. It could be a result of the aristocracy suffering many casualties in the war against Rome, or fleeing to the countryside.
According to historian Emanuele Intagliata, the change can be ascribed to the Roman reorganization following Zenobia's fall, as Palmyra ceased to be a rich caravan city and became a frontier fortress, leading the inhabitants to focus on satisfying the needs of a garrison instead of providing the empire with luxurious oriental items. Such a change in functions would have made the city less attractive for an aristocratic elite.
Palmyra benefited from Umayyad rule, since its role as a frontier city ended and the East-West trade route was restored, leading to the re-emergence of a merchant class. Palmyra's loyalty to the Umayyads led to an aggressive military retaliation from their successors, the Abbasid Caliphate, and the city diminished in size, losing its merchant class.
Following its destruction by Timur, Palmyra maintained the life of a small settlement until its relocation in 1932.

Culture
The scarce artifacts found in the city dating to the Bronze Age reveal that, culturally, Palmyra was most affiliated with western Syria. Classical Palmyra had a distinctive culture, based on a local Semitic tradition, and influenced by Greece and Rome. To appear better integrated into the Roman Empire, some Palmyrenes adopted Greco-Roman names, either alone or in addition to a second native name. The extent of Greek influence on Palmyra's culture is debated. Scholars interpreted the Palmyrenes' Greek practices differently; many see those characters as a superficial layer over a local essence. Palmyra's senate was an example; although Palmyrene texts written in Greek described it as a "boule" (a Greek institution), the senate was a gathering of non-elected tribal elders (a Near-Eastern assembly tradition). Others view Palmyra's culture as a fusion of local and Greco-Roman traditions.

The culture of Persia influenced Palmyrene military tactics, dress and court ceremonies. Palmyra had no large libraries or publishing facilities, and it lacked an intellectual movement characteristic of other Eastern cities such as Edessa or Antioch. Although Zenobia opened her court to academics, the only notable scholar documented was Cassius Longinus.
Palmyra had a large agora. However, unlike the Greek Agoras (public gathering places shared with public buildings), Palmyra's agora resembled an Eastern caravanserai more than a hub of public life. The Palmyrenes buried their dead in elaborate family mausoleums, most with interior walls forming rows of burial chambers (loculi) in which the dead, lying at full length, were placed. A relief of the person interred formed part of the wall's decoration, acting as a headstone. Sarcophagi appeared in the late second century and were used in some of the tombs. Many burial monuments contained mummies embalmed in a method similar to that used in Ancient Egypt.

Art and architecture
Although Palmyrene art was related to that of Greece, it had a distinctive style unique to the middle-Euphrates region. Palmyrene art is well represented by the bust reliefs which seal the openings of its burial chambers. The reliefs emphasized clothing, jewelry and a frontal representation of the person depicted, characteristics which can be seen as a forerunner of Byzantine art. According to Michael Rostovtzeff, Palmyra's art was influenced by Parthian art. However, the origin of frontality that characterized Palmyrene and Parthian arts is a controversial issue; while Parthian origin has been suggested (by Daniel Schlumberger), Michael Avi-Yonah contends that it was a local Syrian tradition that influenced Parthian art. Little painting, and none of the bronze statues of prominent citizens (which stood on brackets on the main columns of the Great Colonnade), have survived. A damaged frieze and other sculptures from the Temple of Bel, many removed to museums in Syria and abroad, suggest the city's public monumental sculpture.
Many surviving funerary busts reached Western museums during the 19th century. Palmyra provided the most convenient Eastern examples bolstering an art-history controversy at the turn of the 20th century: to what extent Eastern influence on Roman art replaced idealized classicism with frontal, hieratic and simplified figures (as believed by Josef Strzygowski and others). This transition is seen as a response to cultural changes in the Western Roman Empire, rather than artistic influence from the East. Palmyrene bust reliefs, unlike Roman sculptures, are rudimentary portraits; although many reflect high quality individuality, the majority vary little across figures of similar age and gender.
Like its art, Palmyra's architecture was influenced by the Greco-Roman style, while preserving local elements (best seen in the Temple of Bel). Enclosed by a massive wall flanked with traditional Roman columns, Bel's sanctuary plan was primarily Semitic. Similar to the Second Temple, the sanctuary consisted of a large courtyard with the deity's main shrine off-center against its entrance (a plan preserving elements of the temples of Ebla and Ugarit).

Site
Cemeteries
West of the ancient walls, the Palmyrenes built a number of large-scale funerary monuments which now form the Valley of Tombs, a one-kilometre-long (0.62 mi) necropolis. The more than 50 monuments were primarily tower-shaped and up to four stories high. Towers were replaced by funerary temples in the first half of the second century AD, as the most recent tower is dated to AD 128. The city had other cemeteries in the north, southwest and southeast, where the tombs are primarily hypogea (underground).

Notable structures
Public buildings
The senate building is largely ruined. It is a small building that consists of a peristyle courtyard and a chamber that has an apse at one end and rows of seats around it.
Much of the Baths of Diocletian are ruined and do not survive above the level of the foundations. The complex's entrance is marked by four massive Egyptian granite columns each 1.3 metres (4 ft 3 in) in diameter, 12.5 metres (41 ft) high and weigh 20 tonnes. Inside, the outline of a bathing pool surrounded by a colonnade of Corinthian columns is still visible in addition to an octagonal room that served as a dressing room containing a drain in its center. Sossianus Hierocles, a governor under Emperor Diocletian, claimed to have built the baths, but the building was probably erected in the late second century and Sossianus Hierocles renovated it.
The Agora of Palmyra is part of a complex that also includes the tariff court and the triclinium, built in the second half of the first century AD. The agora is a massive 71-by-84-metre (233 by 276 ft) structure with 11 entrances. Inside the agora, 200 columnar bases that used to hold statues of prominent citizens were found. The inscriptions on the bases allowed an understanding of the order by which the statues were grouped; the eastern side was reserved for senators, the northern side for Palmyrene officials, the western side for soldiers and the southern side for caravan chiefs.
The Tariff Court is a large rectangular enclosure south of the agora and sharing its northern wall with it. Originally, the entrance of the court was a massive vestibule in its southwestern wall. However, the entrance was blocked by the construction of a defensive wall and the court was entered through three doors from the Agora. The court gained its name by containing a 5-metre (16 ft) stone slab that had the Palmyrene tax law inscribed on it.
The Triclinium of the Agora is at the northwestern corner of the Agora and can host up to 40 people. It is a small 12-by-15-metre (39 by 49 ft) hall decorated with Greek key motifs that run in a continuous line halfway up the wall. The building was probably used by the rulers of the city; the French general director of antiquities in Syria, Henri Seyrig, proposed that it was a small temple before being turned into a triclinium or banqueting hall.

Temples
The Temple of Bel was dedicated in AD 32; it consisted of a large precinct lined by porticos; it had a rectangular shape and was oriented north-south. The exterior wall was 205-metre (673 ft) long with a propylaea, and the cella stood on a podium in the middle of the enclosure.
The Temple of Baalshamin dates to the late 2nd century BC in its earliest phases; its altar was built in AD 115, and it was substantially rebuilt in AD 131. It consisted of a central cella and two colonnaded courtyards north and south of the central structure. A vestibule consisting of six columns preceded the cella which had its side walls decorated with pilasters in Corinthian order.
The Temple of Nabu is largely ruined. The temple was Eastern in its plan; the outer enclosure's propylaea led to a 20-by-9-metre (66 by 30 ft) podium through a portico of which the bases of the columns survives. The peristyle cella opened onto an outdoor altar.

The Temple of Al-Lat is largely ruined with only a podium, a few columns and the door frame remaining. Inside the compound, a giant lion relief (Lion of Al-lāt) was excavated and in its original form, was a relief protruding from the temple compound's wall.
The ruined Temple of Baal-hamon was located on the top of Jabal al-Muntar hill which oversees the spring of Efqa. Constructed in AD 89, it consisted of a cella and a vestibule with two columns. The temple had a defensive tower attached to it; a mosaic depicting the sanctuary was excavated and it revealed that both the cella and the vestibule were decorated with merlons.

Other buildings
The Arch of Triumph was one of Palmyra's monuments that was destroyed by ISIS in 2015 with the use of dynamite.

The Great Colonnade was Palmyra's 1.1-kilometre-long (0.68 mi) main street; most of the columns date to the second century AD and each is 9.50 metres (31.2 ft) high.
The Funerary Temple no. 86 (also known as the House Tomb) is located at the western end of the Great Colonnade. It was built in the third century AD and has a portico of six columns and vine patterns carvings. Inside the chamber, steps leads down to a vault crypt. The shrine might have been connected to the royal family as it is the only tomb inside the city's walls.
The Tetrapylon was erected during the renovations of Diocletian at the end of the third century. It is a square platform and each corner contains a grouping of four columns. Each column group supports a 150-ton cornice and contains a pedestal in its center that originally carried a statue. Out of sixteen columns, only one is original while the rest are from reconstruction work by the Syrian Directorate-General of Antiquities in 1963, using concrete. The original columns were brought from Egypt and carved out of pink granite.
The Walls of Palmyra started in the first century as a protective wall containing gaps where the surrounding mountains formed natural barriers; it encompassed the residential areas, the gardens and the oasis. After 273, Aurelian erected the rampart known as the wall of Diocletian; it enclosed about 80 hectares, a much smaller area than the original pre-273 city.

Destruction by IS
According to eyewitnesses, on 23 May 2015 Islamic State militants destroyed the Lion of Al-lāt and other statues; this came days after the militants had gathered the citizens and promised not to destroy the city's monuments. IS destroyed the Temple of Baalshamin on 23 August 2015. On 30 August 2015, IS destroyed the cella of the Temple of Bel. On 31 August 2015, the United Nations confirmed the temple was destroyed; the temple's exterior walls and entrance arch remain.
It became known on 4 September 2015 that IS had destroyed three of the best preserved tower tombs including the Tower of Elahbel. On 5 October 2015, news media reported that IS was destroying buildings with no religious meaning, including the monumental arch. On 20 January 2017, news emerged that the militants had destroyed the tetrapylon and part of the theater. Following the March 2017 capture of Palmyra by the Syrian Army, Maamoun Abdulkarim, director of antiquities and museums at the Syrian Ministry of Culture, stated that the damage to ancient monuments may be lesser than earlier believed and preliminary pictures showed almost no further damage than what was already known. Antiquities official Wael Hafyan stated that the Tetrapylon was badly damaged while the damage to the facade of the Roman theatre was less serious.

Restoration
In response to the destruction, on 21 October 2015, Creative Commons started the New Palmyra project, an online repository of three-dimensional models representing the city's monuments; the models were generated from images gathered, and released into the public domain, by the Syrian internet advocate Bassel Khartabil between 2005 and 2012. Minor restorations took place; two Palmyrene funerary busts, damaged and defaced by IS, were sent off to Rome where they were restored and sent back to Syria. The restoration of the Lion of Al-lāt took two months and the statue was displayed on 1 October 2017; it will remain in the National Museum of Damascus.
Regarding the restoration, the discoverer of Ebla, Paolo Matthiae, stated that: "The archaeological site of Palmyra is a vast field of ruins and only 20–30% of it is seriously damaged. Unfortunately these included important parts, such as the Temple of Bel, while the Arch of Triumph can be rebuilt." He added: "In any case, by using both traditional methods and advanced technologies, it might be possible to restore 98% of the site".
In February 2022, following acts of restoration and rehabilitation the Afqa spring site was reopened. In October 2022, the Syrian Directorate-General of Antiquities and Museums and the Institute for the History of Material Culture of Russian Academy of Sciences signed an agreement to start the second and third phase of the project for restoring Arch of Triumph. In February 2023, Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums has finalized the study required for restoring Palmyra National Museum which was subjected to damage by ISIS terrorists in 2015. By May 2023, the first phase of the reconstruction and rehabilitation project of the Arch of Triumph was completed. In July 2023, the comprehensive restoration of Roman Theatre started.

History
The area has a rich history of human habitation, with evidence of Paleolithic settlements. Habitation in the area of Tell ez-Zor, dates as far back as the Prepottery Neolithic A period, with a three-unit architectural complex dating to the Prepottery Neolithic B period. In the Efqa Spring site, not far from the Tell, a Neolithic settlement existed, with stone tools dated to 7500 BC. Archaeological sounding in the tell beneath the Temple of Bel uncovered a mud-brick structure built around 2500 BC, followed by structures built during the Middle Bronze Age and Iron Age.

Bronze and Iron Ages
The city entered the historical record during the Bronze Age around 2000 BC, when Puzur-Ishtar the Tadmorean (Palmyrene) agreed to a contract at an Assyrian trading colony in Kultepe. It was mentioned next in the Mari tablets as a stop for trade caravans and nomadic tribes, such as the Suteans, and was conquered along with its region by Yahdun-Lim of Mari. King Shamshi-Adad I of Assyria passed through the area on his way to the Mediterranean at the beginning of the 18th century BC; by then, Palmyra was the easternmost point of the kingdom of Qatna, and it was attacked by the Suteans who paralyzed the traffic along the trade routes. Palmyra was mentioned in a 13th-century BC tablet discovered at Emar, which recorded the names of two "Tadmorean" witnesses. At the beginning of the 11th century BC, King Tiglath-Pileser I of Assyria recorded his defeat of the "Arameans" of "Tadmar"; according to the king, Palmyra was part of the land of Amurru. The city became the eastern border of Aram-Damascus which was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire in 732 BC.
The Hebrew Bible (Second Book of Chronicles 8:4) records a city by the name "Tadmor" as a desert city built (or fortified) by King Solomon of Israel; Flavius Josephus mentions the Greek name "Palmyra", attributing its founding to Solomon in Book VIII of his Antiquities of the Jews. Later Arabic traditions attribute the city's founding to Solomon's Jinn. The association of Palmyra with Solomon is a conflation of "Tadmor" and a city built by Solomon in Judea and known as "Tamar" in the Books of Kings (1 Kings 9:18). The biblical description of "Tadmor" and its buildings does not fit archaeological findings in Palmyra, which was a small settlement during Solomon's reign in the 10th century BC. The Elephantine Jews, a diaspora community established between 650 and 550 BC in Egypt, might have come from Palmyra. Papyrus Amherst 63 indicates that the ancestors of the Elephantine Jews were Samarians. The historian Karel van der Toorn suggested that these ancestors took refuge in Judea after the destruction of their kingdom by Sargon II of Assyria in 721 BC, then had to leave Judea after Sennacherib devastated the land in 701 BC and headed to Palmyra. This scenario can explain the usage of Aramaic by the Elephantine Jews, and Papyrus Amherst 63, while not mentioning Palmyra, refers to a "fortress of palms" that is located near a spring on a trade route in the fringes of the desert, making Palmyra a plausible candidate.

Hellenistic and Roman periods
During the Hellenistic period under the Seleucids (between 312 and 64 BC), Palmyra became a prosperous settlement owing allegiance to the Seleucid king. Evidence for Palmyra's urbanisation in the Hellenistic period is rare; an important piece is the Laghman II inscription found in Laghman, modern Afghanistan, and commissioned by the Indian emperor Ashoka c. 250 BC. The reading is contested, but according to semitologist André Dupont-Sommer, the inscription records the distance to "Tdmr" (Palmyra). In 217 BC, a Palmyrene force led by Zabdibel joined the army of King Antiochus III in the Battle of Raphia which ended in a Seleucid defeat by Ptolemaic Egypt. In the middle of the Hellenistic era, Palmyra, formerly south of the al-Qubur wadi, began to expand beyond its northern bank. By the late second century BC, the tower tombs in the Palmyrene Valley of Tombs and the city temples (most notably, the temples of Baalshamin, Al-lāt and the Hellenistic temple) began to be built. A fragmentary inscription in Greek from the Temple of Bel's foundations mentions a king titled Epiphanes, a title used by the Seleucid kings.
In 64 BC, the Roman Republic conquered the Seleucid kingdom, and the Roman general Pompey established the province of Syria. Palmyra was left independent, trading with Rome and Parthia but belonging to neither. The earliest known inscription in Palmyrene is dated to around 44 BC; Palmyra was still a minor sheikhdom, offering water to caravans which occasionally took the desert route on which it was located. However, according to Appian, Palmyra was wealthy enough for Mark Antony to send a force to conquer it in 41 BC. The Palmyrenes evacuated to Parthian lands beyond the eastern bank of the Euphrates, which they prepared to defend.

Autonomous Palmyrene region
Palmyra became part of the Roman Empire when it was conquered and paid tribute early in the reign of Tiberius, around 14 AD. The Romans included Palmyra in the province of Syria, and defined the region's boundaries. Pliny the Elder asserted that both the Palmyrene and Emesene regions were contiguous; a marker at the Palmyrene's southwestern border was found in 1936 by Daniel Schlumberger at Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, dating from the reign of Hadrian or one of his successors, which marked the boundary between the two regions. This boundary probably ran northwards to Khirbet al-Bilaas on Jabal al-Bilas where another marker, laid by the Roman governor Silanus, has been found, 75 kilometres (47 mi) northwest of Palmyra, probably marking a boundary with the territory of Epiphania. Meanwhile, Palmyra's eastern border extended to the Euphrates valley. This region included numerous villages subordinate to the center, including large settlements such as al-Qaryatayn. The Roman imperial period brought great prosperity to the city, which enjoyed a privileged status under the empire—retaining much of its internal autonomy, being ruled by a council, and incorporating many Greek city-state (polis) institutions into its government.
The earliest Palmyrene text attesting a Roman presence in the city dates to 18 AD, when the Roman general Germanicus tried to develop a friendly relationship with Parthia; he sent the Palmyrene Alexandros to Mesene, a Parthian vassal kingdom. This was followed by the arrival of the Roman legion Legio X Fretensis the following year. Roman authority was minimal during the first century AD, although tax collectors were resident, and a road connecting Palmyra and Sura was built in AD 75. The Romans used Palmyrene soldiers, but (unlike typical Roman cities) no local magistrates or prefects are recorded in the city. Palmyra saw intensive construction during the first century, including the city's first walled fortifications, and the Temple of Bel (completed and dedicated in 32 AD). During the first century Palmyra developed from a minor desert caravan station into a leading trading center, with Palmyrene merchants establishing colonies in surrounding trade centers.
Palmyrene trade reached its acme during the second century, aided by two factors; the first was a trade route built by Palmyrenes, and protected by garrisons at major locations, including a garrison in Dura-Europos manned in 117 AD. The second was the Roman conquest of the Nabataean capital Petra in 106, shifting control over southern trade routes of the Arabian Peninsula from the Nabataeans to Palmyra. In 129 Palmyra was visited by Hadrian, who named it "Hadriane Palmyra" and made it a free city. Hadrian promoted Hellenism throughout the empire, and Palmyra's urban expansion was modeled on that of Greece. This led to new projects, including the theatre, the colonnade and the Temple of Nabu. Roman garrisons are first attested in Palmyra in 167, when the cavalry Ala I Thracum Herculiana was moved to the city. By the end of the second century, urban development diminished after the city's building projects peaked.
In the 190s, Palmyra was assigned to the province of Phoenice, newly created by the Severan dynasty. Toward the end of the second century, Palmyra began a steady transition from a traditional Greek city-state to a monarchy due to the increasing militarization of the city and the deteriorating economic situation; the Severan ascension to the imperial throne in Rome played a major role in Palmyra's transition:

The Severan-led Roman–Parthian War, from 194 to 217, influenced regional security and affected the city's trade. Bandits began attacking caravans by 199, leading Palmyra to strengthen its military presence.
The new dynasty favored the city, stationing the Cohors I Flavia Chalcidenorum garrison there by 206. Caracalla made Palmyra a colonia between 213 and 216, replacing many Greek institutions with Roman constitutional ones. Severus Alexander, emperor from 222 to 235, visited Palmyra in 229.

Palmyrene kingdom
The rise of the Sasanian Empire in Persia considerably damaged Palmyrene trade. The Sasanians disbanded Palmyrene colonies in their lands, and began a war against the Roman Empire. In an inscription dated to 252 Odaenathus appears bearing the title of exarchos (lord) of Palmyra. The weakness of the Roman Empire and the constant Persian danger were probably the reasons behind the Palmyrene council's decision to elect a lord for the city in order for him to lead a strengthened army. Odaenathus approached Shapur I of Persia to request him to guarantee Palmyrene interests in Persia, but was rebuffed. In 260 the Emperor Valerian fought Shapur at the Battle of Edessa, but was defeated and captured. One of Valerian's officers, Macrianus Major, his sons Quietus and Macrianus, and the prefect Balista rebelled against Valerian's son Gallienus, usurping imperial power in Syria.

Persian wars
Odaenathus formed an army of Palmyrenes and Syrian peasants against Shapur. According to the Augustan History, Odaenathus declared himself king prior to the battle. The Palmyrene leader won a decisive victory near the banks of the Euphrates later in 260 forcing the Persians to retreat. In 261 Odaenathus marched against the remaining usurpers in Syria, defeating and killing Quietus and Balista. As a reward, he received the title Imperator Totius Orientis ("Governor of the East") from Gallienus, and ruled Syria, Mesopotamia, Arabia and Anatolia's eastern regions as the imperial representative. Palmyra itself remained officially part of the empire but Palmyrene inscriptions started to describe it as a "metrocolonia", indicating that the city's status was higher than normal Roman colonias. In practice, Palmyra shifted from a provincial city to a de facto allied kingdom.
In 262 Odaenathus launched a new campaign against Shapur, reclaiming the rest of Roman Mesopotamia (most importantly, the cities of Nisibis and Carrhae), sacking the Jewish city of Nehardea, and besieging the Persian capital Ctesiphon. Following his victory, the Palmyrene monarch assumed the title King of Kings. Later, Odaenathus crowned his son Hairan I as co-King of Kings near Antioch in 263. Although he did not take the Persian capital, Odaenathus drove the Persians out of all Roman lands conquered since the beginning of Shapur's wars in 252. In a second campaign that took place in 266, the Palmyrene king reached Ctesiphon again; however, he had to leave the siege and move north, accompanied by Hairan I, to repel Gothic attacks on Asia Minor. The king and his son were assassinated during their return in 267; according to the Augustan History and Joannes Zonaras, Odaenathus was killed by a cousin (Zonaras says nephew) named in the History as Maeonius. The Augustan History also says that Maeonius was proclaimed emperor for a brief period before being killed by the soldiers. However, no inscriptions or other evidence exist for Maeonius' reign.

Odaenathus was succeeded by his son; the ten-year-old Vaballathus. Zenobia, the mother of the new king, was the de facto ruler and Vaballathus remained in her shadow while she consolidated her power. Gallienus dispatched his prefect Heraclian to command military operations against the Persians, but he was marginalized by Zenobia and returned to the West. The queen was careful not to provoke Rome, claiming for herself and her son the titles held by her husband while guaranteeing the safety of the borders with Persia and pacifying the Tanukhids in Hauran. To protect the borders with Persia, Zenobia fortified different settlements on the Euphrates including the citadels of Halabiye and Zalabiye. Circumstantial evidence exist for confrontations with the Sasanians; probably in 269 Vaballathus took the title Persicus Maximus ("The great victor in Persia") and the title might be linked with an unrecorded battle against a Persian army trying to regain control of Northern Mesopotamia.

Palmyrene empire
Zenobia began her military career in the spring of 270, during the reign of Claudius Gothicus. Under the pretext of attacking the Tanukhids, she conquered Roman Arabia. This was followed in October by an invasion of Egypt, ending with a Palmyrene victory and Zenobia's proclamation as queen of Egypt. Palmyra invaded Anatolia the following year, reaching Ankara and the pinnacle of its expansion. The conquests were made behind a mask of subordination to Rome. Zenobia issued coins in the name of Claudius' successor Aurelian, with Vaballathus depicted as king; since Aurelian was occupied with repelling insurgencies in Europe, he tolerated the Palmyrene coinage and encroachments. In late 271, Vaballathus and his mother assumed the titles of Augustus (emperor) and Augusta.
The following year, Aurelian crossed the Bosphorus and advanced quickly through Anatolia. According to one account, Roman general Marcus Aurelius Probus regained Egypt from Palmyra; Aurelian entered Issus and headed to Antioch, where he defeated Zenobia in the Battle of Immae. Zenobia was defeated again at the Battle of Emesa, taking refuge in Homs before quickly returning to her capital. When the Romans besieged Palmyra, Zenobia refused their order to surrender in person to the emperor. She escaped east to ask the Persians for help, but was captured by the Romans; the city capitulated soon afterwards.

Later Roman and Byzantine periods
Aurelian spared the city and stationed a garrison of 600 archers, led by Sandarion, as a peacekeeping force. In 273 Palmyra rebelled under the leadership of Septimius Apsaios, declaring Antiochus (a relative of Zenobia) as Augustus. Aurelian marched against Palmyra, razing it to the ground and seizing the most valuable monuments to decorate his Temple of Sol. Palmyrene buildings were smashed, residents massacred and the Temple of Bel pillaged.
Palmyra was significantly reduced and it largely disappeared from historical records of that period. After its sacking, Aurelian repaired the Temple of Bel, and the Legio I Illyricorum was stationed in the city. Shortly before 303 the Camp of Diocletian, a castrum in the western part of the city, was built. The 4-hectare (9.9-acre) camp was a base for the Legio I Illyricorum, which guarded the trade routes around the city. Though some of the city would not be rebuilt, Palmyra would become a major stronghold and fortress in the East. Thanks in part to this, in the following years Palmyra began to regain importance, becoming a Christian city in the decades following its destruction by Aurelian. In late 527, Justinian I further strengthened the city, ordering the restoration of Palmyra's churches and public buildings to protect the empire against raids by Lakhmid king Al-Mundhir III ibn al-Nu'man.

Arab caliphates
Palmyra was conquered by the Rashidun Caliphate after its 634 capture by the Muslim general Khalid ibn al-Walid, who took the city on his way to Damascus; an 18-day march by his army through the Syrian Desert from Mesopotamia. By then Palmyra was limited to the Diocletian camp. After the conquest, the city became part of Homs Province.

Umayyad and early Abbasid periods
Palmyra prospered as part of the Umayyad Caliphate, and its population grew. It was a key stop on the East-West trade route, with a large souq (market), built by the Umayyads, who also commissioned part of the Temple of Bel as a mosque. During this period, Palmyra was a stronghold of the Banu Kalb tribe, which began to take abode in and around the city after the conquest. After being defeated by Marwan II during a civil war in the caliphate, Umayyad contender Sulayman ibn Hisham fled to the Banu Kalb in Palmyra, but eventually pledged allegiance to Marwan in 744; Palmyra continued to oppose Marwan until the surrender of the Banu Kalb chief al-Asbagh ibn Dhu'ala in 745. That year, Marwan ordered the city's walls demolished.
In 750 a revolt, led by Majza'a ibn al-Kawthar and Umayyad pretender Abu Muhammad al-Sufyani, against the new Abbasid Caliphate swept across Syria; the tribes in Palmyra supported the rebels. After his defeat Abu Muhammad took refuge in the city, which withstood an Abbasid assault long enough to allow him to escape.

Decentralization
Abbasid power dwindled during the 10th century, when the empire disintegrated and was divided among a number of vassals. Most of the new rulers acknowledged the caliph as their nominal sovereign, a situation which continued until the Mongol destruction of the Abbasid Caliphate in 1258.
The population of the city started to decrease in the ninth century and the process continued in the tenth century. In 955 Sayf al-Dawla, the Hamdanid prince of Aleppo, defeated the nomads near the city, and built a kasbah (fortress) in response to campaigns by the Byzantine emperors Nikephoros II Phokas and John I Tzimiskes. With the advent of Fatimid rule in the late 10th century, Palmyra remained a stronghold of the Kalb and taxes on the oasis' crops was a major source of the tribe's income. Toward the end of the century, the Kalb around Palmyra migrated from the area. Earthquakes devastated Palmyra in 1068 and 1089. In the 1070s Syria was conquered by the Seljuk Empire, and in 1082, the district of Homs came under the control of the Arab lord Khalaf ibn Mula'ib. The latter was a brigand and was removed and imprisoned in 1090 by the Seljuq sultan Malik-Shah I. Khalaf's lands were given to Malik-Shah's brother, Tutush I, who gained his independence after his brother's 1092 death and established a cadet branch of the Seljuk dynasty in Syria.

By the twelfth century, the population moved into the courtyard of the Temple of Bel which was fortified; Palmyra was then ruled by Toghtekin, the Burid atabeg of Damascus, who appointed his nephew governor. Toghtekin's nephew was killed by rebels, and the atabeg retook the city in 1126. Palmyra was given to Toghtekin's grandson, Shihab-ud-din Mahmud, who was replaced by governor Yusuf ibn Firuz when Shihab-ud-din Mahmud returned to Damascus after his father Taj al-Muluk Buri succeeded Toghtekin. The Burids transformed the Temple of Bel into a citadel in 1132, fortifying the city, and transferring it to the Bin Qaraja family three years later in exchange for Homs.
During the mid-twelfth century, Palmyra was ruled by the Zengid king Nur ad-Din Mahmud. It became part of the district of Homs, which was given as a fiefdom to the Ayyubid general Shirkuh in 1168 and confiscated after his death in 1169. Homs region was conquered by the Ayyubid sultanate in 1174; the following year, Saladin gave Homs (including Palmyra) to his cousin Nasir al-Din Muhammad as a fiefdom. After Saladin's death, the Ayyubid realm was divided and Palmyra was given to Nasir al-Din Muhammad's son Al-Mujahid Shirkuh II (who built the castle of Palmyra known as Fakhr-al-Din al-Maani Castle around 1230). Five years earlier, Syrian geographer Yaqut al-Hamawi described Palmyra's residents as living in "a castle surrounded by a stone wall".

Mamluk period
Palmyra was used as a refuge by Shirkuh II's grandson, al-Ashraf Musa, who allied himself with the Mongol king Hulagu Khan and fled after the Mongol defeat in the 1260 Battle of Ain Jalut against the Mamluks. Al-Ashraf Musa asked the Mamluk sultan Qutuz for pardon and was accepted as a vassal. Al-Ashraf Musa died in 1263 without an heir, bringing the Homs district under direct Mamluk rule.

Al Fadl principality
The Al Fadl clan (a branch of the Tayy tribe) were loyal to the Mamluks, and in 1281, Prince Issa bin Muhanna of the Al Fadl was appointed lord of Palmyra by sultan Qalawun. Issa was succeeded in 1284 by his son Muhanna bin Issa who was imprisoned by sultan al-Ashraf Khalil in 1293, and restored two years later by sultan al-Adil Kitbugha. Muhanna declared his loyalty to Öljaitü of the Ilkhanate in 1312 and was dismissed and replaced with his brother Fadl by sultan an-Nasir Muhammad. Although Muhanna was forgiven by an-Nasir and restored in 1317, he and his tribe were expelled in 1320 for his continued relations with the Ilkhanate, and he was replaced by tribal chief Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr.
Muhanna was forgiven and restored by an-Nasir in 1330; he remained loyal to the sultan until his death in 1335, when he was succeeded by his son. Contemporary historian Ibn Fadlallah al-Omari described the city as having "vast gardens, flourishing trades and bizarre monuments". The Al Fadl clan protected the trade routes and villages from Bedouin raids, raiding other cities and fighting among themselves. The Mamluks intervened militarily several times, dismissing, imprisoning or expelling its leaders. In 1400 Palmyra was attacked by Timur; the Fadl prince Nu'air escaped the battle and later fought Jakam, the sultan of Aleppo. Nu'air was captured, taken to Aleppo and executed in 1406; this, according to Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, ended the Al Fadl clan's power.

Ottoman era
While most of Syria came under Ottoman rule in 1516, Palmyra (Tadmur) does not appear to have been incorporated into the Empire before the conquest of Iraq in 1534–1535. It first appears as the centre of an administrative district (sanjak) around 1560. The region was important to the Ottomans above all for its salt deposits. In 1568, the governor of the sancak restored the medieval citadel. After 1568 the Ottomans appointed the Lebanese emir Ali bin Musa Harfush as governor of Palmyra's sanjak, dismissing him in 1584 for insubordination. In 1630 Palmyra came under the tax authority of another Lebanese emir, Fakhr-al-Din II, who renovated Shirkuh II's castle (which became known as Fakhr-al-Din al-Maani Castle). The prince fell from grace with the Ottomans in 1633 and lost control of the village, which remained a separate sanjak until it was absorbed by Zor Sanjak in 1857. The Ottoman governor of Syria, Mehmed Rashid Pasha, established a garrison in the village to control the Bedouin in 1867.

20th century
In 1918, as World War I was ending, the Royal Air Force built an airfield for two planes, and in November the Ottomans retreated from Zor Sanjak without a fight. The Syrian Emirate's army entered Deir ez-Zor on 4 December, and Zor Sanjak became part of Syria. In 1919, as the British and French argued over the borders of the planned mandates, the British permanent military representative to the Supreme War Council Henry Wilson suggested adding Palmyra to the British mandate. However, the British general Edmund Allenby persuaded his government to abandon this plan. Syria (including Palmyra) became part of the French Mandate after Syria's defeat in the Battle of Maysalun on 24 July 1920.
With Palmyra gaining importance in the French efforts to pacify the Syrian Desert, a base was constructed in the village near the Temple of Bel in 1921. In 1929, Henri Seyrig, began excavating the ruins and convinced the villagers to move to a new, French-built village next to the site. The relocation was completed in 1932; ancient Palmyra was ready for excavation as its villagers settled into the new village of Tadmur. During World War II, the Mandate came under the authority of Vichy France, who gave permission to Nazi Germany to use the airfield at Palmyra; forces of Free France, backed by British forces, invaded Syria in June 1941, and on 3 July 1941, the British took control over the city in the aftermath of a battle.

Syrian civil war
As a result of the Syrian civil war, Palmyra experienced widespread looting and damage by combatants. In 2013, the façade of the Temple of Bel sustained a large hole from mortar fire, and colonnade columns have been damaged by shrapnel. According to Maamoun Abdulkarim, the Syrian Army positioned its troops in some archaeological-site areas, while Syrian opposition fighters positioned themselves in gardens around the city.
On 13 May 2015, ISIL launched an attack on the modern town of Tadmur, sparking fears that the iconoclastic group would destroy the adjacent ancient site of Palmyra. On 21 May, some artifacts were transported from the Palmyra museum to Damascus for safekeeping; a number of Greco-Roman busts, jewelry, and other objects looted from the museum have been found on the international market. ISIL forces entered Palmyra the same day. Local residents reported that the Syrian Air Force bombed the site on 13 June, damaging the northern wall close to the Temple of Baalshamin. During ISIL's occupation of the site, Palmyra's theatre was used as a place of public executions of their opponents and captives; videos were released by ISIL showing the killing of Syrian prisoners in front of crowds at the theatre. On 18 August, Palmyra's retired antiquities chief Khaled al-Asaad was beheaded by ISIL after being tortured for a month to extract information about the city and its treasures; al-Asaad refused to give any information to his captors.
Syrian government forces supported by Russian airstrikes recaptured Palmyra on 27 March 2016 after intense fighting against ISIL fighters. According to initial reports, the damage to the archaeological site was less extensive than anticipated, with numerous structures still standing. Following the recapture of the city, Russian de-mining teams began clearing mines planted by ISIL prior to their retreat. Following heavy fighting, ISIL briefly reoccupied the city on 11 December 2016, prompting an offensive by the Syrian Army which retook the city on 2 March 2017.
On 7 December 2024, Palmyra was retaken by the Syrian Free Army. Damage to the city was heavy.
Since the fall of Assad various plans and initiatives were disclosed in order to revitalize the area by numerous entities within Syria. One of such entities, the Syrian Liberal Party, currently led by Fahad al-Masri, advocated to turn Palmyra in an economic hub by connecting it by railways to major Syrian cities such as Damascus, Homs and Deir Ez-Zor and turn it into the main regional economic center. The SLP plan is to also construct oil refineries and networks of oil pipelines reaching Arabia, the Gulf States, Anatolia, Europe and Northern Africa. The Syrian transitional government stationed guards as to protect the area from further damage and has hinted at reconstruction programs in the following years, however, it has yet to give permission to license non-governmental organizations to send in experts to assess the damage to the ancient site and maybe act on it. Even foreign entities showcased their interest in investing in the region, with Turkiye planning to build a military base in the area.

Government
From the beginning of its history to the first century AD Palmyra was a petty sheikhdom, and by the first century BC a Palmyrene identity began to develop. During the first half of the first century AD, Palmyra incorporated some of the institutions of a Greek city (polis); the notion of an existing citizenship first appears in an inscription, dated to AD 10, mentioning the "people of Palmyra". In AD 74, an inscription mentions the city's boule (senate). The tribal role in Palmyra is debated; during the first century, four treasurers representing the four tribes seems to have partially controlled the administration but their role became ceremonial by the second century and power rested in the hands of the council.
The Palmyrene council consisted of about six hundred members of the local elite (such as the elders or heads of wealthy families or clans), representing the city's four-quarters. The council, headed by a president, managed civic responsibilities; it supervised public works (including the construction of public buildings), approved expenditures, collected taxes, and appointed two archons (lords) each year. Palmyra's military was led by strategoi (generals) appointed by the council. Roman provincial authority set and approved Palmyra's tariff structure, but the provincial interference in local government was kept minimal as the empire sought to ensure the continuous success of Palmyrene trade most beneficial to Rome. An imposition of direct provincial administration would have jeopardized Palmyra's ability to conduct its trading activities in the East, especially in Parthia.
With the elevation of Palmyra to a colonia around 213–216, the city ceased being subject to Roman provincial governors and taxes. Palmyra incorporated Roman institutions into its system while keeping many of its former ones. The council remained, and the strategos designated one of two annually-elected magistrates. This duumviri implemented the new colonial constitution, replacing the archons. Palmyra's political scene changed with the rise of Odaenathus and his family; an inscription dated to 251 describes Odaenathus' son Hairan I as "Ras" (lord) of Palmyra (exarch in the Greek section of the inscription) and another inscription dated to 252 describes Odaenathus with the same title. Odaenathus was probably elected by the council as exarch, which was an unusual title in the Roman empire and was not part of the traditional Palmyrene governance institutions. Whether Odaenathus' title indicated a military or a priestly position is unknown, but the military role is more likely. By 257 Odaenathus was known as a consularis, possibly the legatus of the province of Phoenice. In 258 Odaenathus began extending his political influence, taking advantage of regional instability caused by Sasanian aggression; this culminated in the Battle of Edessa, Odaenathus' royal elevation and mobilization of troops, which made Palmyra a kingdom.
The monarchy continued most civic institutions, but the duumviri and the council were no longer attested after 264; Odaenathus appointed a governor for the city. In the absence of the monarch, the city was administered by a viceroy. Although governors of the eastern Roman provinces under Odaenathus' control were still appointed by Rome, the king had overall authority. During Zenobia's rebellion, governors were appointed by the queen. Not all Palmyrenes accepted the dominion of the royal family; a senator, Septimius Haddudan, appears in a later Palmyrene inscription as aiding Aurelian's armies during the 273 rebellion. After the Roman destruction of the city, Palmyra was ruled directly by Rome, and then by a succession of other rulers, including the Burids and Ayyubids, and subordinate Bedouin chiefs—primarily the Fadl family, who governed for the Mamluks.

Military
Due to its military character and efficiency in battle, Palmyra was described by Irfan Shahîd as the "Sparta among the cities of the Orient, Arab and other, and even its gods were represented dressed in military uniforms." Palmyra's army protected the city and its economy, helping extend Palmyrene authority beyond the city walls and protecting the countryside's desert trade routes. The city had a substantial military; Zabdibel commanded a force of 10,000 in the third century BC, and Zenobia led an army of 70,000 in the Battle of Emesa. Soldiers were recruited from the city and its territories, spanning several thousand square kilometers from the outskirts of Homs to the Euphrates valley. Non-Palmyrene soldiers were also recruited; a Nabatean cavalryman is recorded in 132 as serving in a Palmyrene unit stationed at Anah. Palmyra's recruiting system is unknown; the city might have selected and equipped the troops and the strategoi led, trained and disciplined them.
The strategoi were appointed by the council with the approval of Rome. The royal army in the mid 3rd century AD was under the leadership of the monarch aided by generals, and was modeled on the Sasanians in arms and tactics. The Palmyrenes were noted archers. They used infantry while a heavily armored cavalry (clibanarii) constituted the main attacking force. Palmyra's infantry was armed with swords, lances and small round shields; the clibanarii were fully armored (including their horses), and used heavy spears (kontos) 3.65 metres (12.0 ft) long without shields.

Relations with Rome
Citing the Palmyrenes' combat skills in large, sparsely populated areas, the Romans formed a Palmyrene auxilia to serve in the Imperial Roman army. Vespasian reportedly had 8,000 Palmyrene archers in Judea, and Trajan established the first Palmyrene Auxilia in 116 (a camel cavalry unit, Ala I Ulpia dromedariorum Palmyrenorum). Palmyrene units were deployed throughout the Roman Empire, serving in Dacia late in Hadrian's reign, and at El Kantara in Numidia and Moesia under Antoninus Pius. During the late second century Rome formed the Cohors XX Palmyrenorum, which was stationed in Dura-Europos.

Religion
Palmyra's gods were primarily part of the northwestern Semitic pantheon, with the addition of gods from the Mesopotamian and Arab pantheons. The city's chief pre-Hellenistic deity was called Bol, an abbreviation of Baal (a northwestern Semitic honorific). The Babylonian cult of Bel-Marduk influenced the Palmyrene religion and by 217 BC the chief deity's name was changed to Bel. This did not indicate the replacing of the northwestern Semitic Bol with a Mesopotamian deity, but was a mere change in the name.
Second in importance, after the supreme deity, were over sixty ancestral gods of the Palmyrene clans. Palmyra had unique deities, such as the god of justice and Efqa's guardian Yarhibol, the sun god Malakbel, and the moon god Aglibol. Palmyrenes worshiped regional deities, including the greater Levantine gods Astarte, Baal-hamon, Baalshamin and Atargatis; the Babylonian gods Nabu and Nergal, and the Arab Azizos, Arsu, Šams and Al-lāt.
The deities worshiped in the countryside were depicted as camel or horse riders and bore Arab names. The nature of those deities is uncertain as only names are known, most importantly Abgal. The Palmyrene pantheon included ginnaye (some were given the designation "Gad"), a group of lesser deities popular in the countryside, who were similar to the Arab jinn and the Roman genius. Ginnaye were believed to have the appearance and behavior of humans, similar to Arab jinn. Unlike jinn, however, the ginnaye could not possess or injure humans. Their role was similar to the Roman genius: tutelary deities who guarded individuals and their caravans, cattle and villages.
Although the Palmyrenes worshiped their deities as individuals, some were associated with other gods. Bel had Astarte-Belti as his consort, and formed a triple deity with Aglibol and Yarhibol (who became a sun god in his association with Bel). Malakbel was part of many associations, pairing with Gad Taimi and Aglibol, and forming a triple deity with Baalshamin and Aglibol. Palmyra hosted an Akitu (spring festival) each Nisan. Each of the city's four-quarters had a sanctuary for a deity considered ancestral to the resident tribe; Malakbel and Aglibol's sanctuary was in the Komare quarter. The Baalshamin sanctuary was in the Ma'zin quarter, the Arsu sanctuary in the Mattabol quarter, and the Atargatis sanctuary in the fourth tribe's quarter.

The priests of Palmyra were selected from the city's leading families, and are recognized in busts through their headdresses which have the shape of a polos adorned with laurel wreath or other tree made of bronze among other elements. The high priest of Bel's temple was the highest religious authority and headed the clergy of priests who were organized into collegia each headed by a higher priest. The personnel of Efqa spring's sanctuary dedicated to Yarhibol belonged to a special class of priests as they were oracles. Palmyra's paganism was replaced with Christianity as the religion spread across the Roman Empire, and a bishop was reported in the city by 325. Although most temples became churches, the Temple of Al-lāt was destroyed in 385 at the order of Maternus Cynegius (the eastern praetorian prefect). After the Muslim conquest in 634 Islam gradually replaced Christianity, and the last known bishop of Palmyra was consecrated after 818.

Malakbel and the Roman Sol Invictus
In 274, following his victory over Palmyra, Aurelian dedicated a large temple of Sol Invictus in Rome; most scholars consider Aurelian's Sol Invictus to be of Syrian origin, either a continuation of emperor Elagabalus cult of Sol Invictus Elagabalus, or Malakbel of Palmyra. The Palmyrene deity was commonly identified with the Roman god Sol and he had a temple dedicated for him on the right bank of the Tiber since the second century. Also, he bore the epithet Invictus and was known with the name Sol "Sanctissimus", the latter was an epithet Aurelian bore on an inscription from Capena.
The position of the Palmyrene deity as Aurelian's Sol Invictus is inferred from a passage by Zosimus reading: "and the magnificent temple of the sun he (i.e. Aurelian) embellished with votive gifts from Palmyra, setting up statues of Helios and Bel". Three deities from Palmyra exemplified solar features: Malakbel, Yarhibol and Šams, hence the identification of the Palmyrene Helios appearing in Zosimus' work with Malakbel. Some scholars criticize the notion of Malakbel's identification with Sol Invictus; according to Gaston Halsberghe, the cult of Malakbel was too local for it to become an imperial Roman god and Aurelian's restoration of Bel's temple and sacrifices dedicated to Malakbel were a sign of his attachment to the sun god in general and his respect to the many ways in which the deity was worshiped. Richard Stoneman suggested another approach in which Aurelian simply borrowed the imagery of Malakbel to enhance his own solar deity. The relation between Malakbel and Sol Invictus can not be confirmed and will probably remain unresolved.

Economy
Palmyra's economy before and at the beginning of the Roman period was based on agriculture, pastoralism, and trade; the city served as a rest station for the caravans which sporadically crossed the desert. By the end of the first century BC, the city had a mixed economy based on agriculture, pastoralism, taxation, and, most importantly, the caravan trade. Taxation was an important source of revenue for the Palmyrene government. Caravaneers paid taxes in the building known as the Tariff Court, where a tax law dating to AD 137 was exhibited. The law regulated the tariffs paid by the merchants for goods sold at the internal market or exported from the city.
The classicist Andrew M. Smith II suggested that most land in Palmyra was owned by the city, which collected grazing taxes. The oasis had about 1,000 hectares (2,500 acres) of irrigable land, which surrounded the city. The Palmyrenes constructed an extensive irrigation system in the northern mountains that consisted of reservoirs and channels to capture and store the occasional rainfall. The most notable irrigation work is Harbaqa Dam which was constructed in the late first century AD; it is located 48 km (30 mi) southwest of the city and can collect 140,000 cubic metres (4,900,000 cu ft) of water. Terebinth trees in the hinterland were an important source of charcoal, resin and oil; although evidence is lacking, it is possible that olive trees were also planted, and dairy products were produced in the villages; it is also apparent that barley was cultivated. However, agriculture could not support the population and food was imported.
After Palmyra's destruction in 273, it became a market for villagers and nomads from the surrounding area. The city regained some of its prosperity during the Umayyad era, indicated by the discovery of a large Umayyad souq in the colonnaded street. Palmyra was a minor trading center until its destruction in 1400; according to Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi, Timur's men took 200,000 sheep, and the city was reduced into a settlement on the desert border whose inhabitants herded and cultivated small plots for vegetables and corn.

Commerce
If the Laghman II inscription in Afghanistan is referring to Palmyra, then the city's role in Central Asian overland trade was prominent as early as the third century BC. During the first centuries AD, Palmyra's main trade route ran east to the Euphrates where it connected at the city of Hīt. The route then ran south along the river toward the port of Charax Spasinu on the Persian Gulf, where Palmyrene ships traveled back and forth to India. Goods were imported from India, China and Transoxiana, and exported west to Emesa (or Antioch) then the Mediterranean ports, from which they were distributed throughout the Roman Empire. In addition to the usual route some Palmyrene merchants used the Red Sea, probably as a result of the Roman–Parthian Wars. Goods were carried overland from the seaports to a Nile port, and then taken to the Egyptian Mediterranean ports for export. Inscriptions attesting a Palmyrene presence in Egypt date to the reign of Hadrian.
Since Palmyra was not on the main trading route (which followed the Euphrates), the Palmyrenes secured the desert route passing their city. They connected it to the Euphrates valley, providing water and shelter. The Palmyrene route connected the Silk Road with the Mediterranean, and was used almost exclusively by the city's merchants, who maintained a presence in many cities, including Dura-Europos in 33 BC, Babylon by AD 19, Seleucia by AD 24, Dendera, Coptos, Bahrain, the Indus River Delta, Merv and Rome.
The caravan trade depended on patrons and merchants. Patrons owned the land on which the caravan animals were raised, providing animals and guards for the merchants. The lands were located in the numerous villages of the Palmyrene countryside. Although merchants used the patrons to conduct business, their roles often overlapped and a patron would sometimes lead a caravan. Commerce made Palmyra and its merchants among the wealthiest in the region. Some caravans were financed by a single merchant, such as Male' Agrippa (who financed Hadrian's visit in 129 and the 139 rebuilding of the Temple of Bel). The primary income-generating trade good was silk, which was exported from the East to the West. Other exported goods included jade, muslin, spices, ebony, ivory and precious stones. For its domestic market Palmyra imported a variety of goods including slaves, prostitutes, olive oil, dyed goods, myrrh and perfume.

Research and excavations
Palmyra's first scholarly description appeared in a 1695 paper in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society by William Hallifax followed by a 1696 book by Abednego Seller. In 1751, an expedition led by Robert Wood and James Dawkins studied Palmyra's architecture. French artist and architect Louis-François Cassas conducted an extensive survey of the city's monuments in 1785, publishing over a hundred drawings of Palmyra's civic buildings and tombs. Palmyra was photographed for the first time in 1864 by Louis Vignes. In 1882, the Palmyra Tariff, an inscribed stone slab from AD 137 in Greek and Palmyrene detailing import and export taxation, was discovered by prince Semyon Semyonovich Abamelik-Lazarev in the Tariff Court. It has been described by the historian John F. Matthews as "one of the most important single items of evidence for the economic life of any part of the Roman Empire". In 1901, the slab was gifted by the Ottoman Sultan Abdul Hamid II to the Russian Tsar and is now in the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg.

Palmyra's first excavations were conducted in 1902 by Otto Puchstein and in 1917 by Theodor Wiegand. In 1929, French general director of antiquities of Syria and Lebanon Henri Seyrig began large-scale excavation of the site; interrupted by World War II, it resumed soon after the war's end. Seyrig started with the Temple of Bel in 1929 and between 1939 and 1940 he excavated the Agora. Daniel Schlumberger conducted excavations in the Palmyrene northwest countryside in 1934 and 1935 where he studied different local sanctuaries in the Palmyrene villages. From 1954 to 1956, a Swiss expedition organized by UNESCO excavated the Temple of Baalshamin. Since 1958, the site has been excavated by the Syrian Directorate-General of Antiquities, and Polish expeditions of the Polish Centre of Mediterranean Archaeology University of Warsaw, led by many archaeologists including Kazimierz Michałowski (until 1980), Michał Gawlikowski (until 2009) and Grzegorz Majcherek (until now). The stratigraphic sounding beneath the Temple of Bel was conducted in 1967 by Robert du Mesnil du Buisson, who also discovered the Temple of Baal-hamon in the 1970s. In 1980, the historic site including the necropolis outside the walls was declared a World Heritage Site by the UNESCO.
The Polish expedition concentrated its work on the Camp of Diocletian while the Syrian Directorate-General of Antiquities excavated the Temple of Nabu. Most of the hypogea were excavated jointly by the Polish expedition and the Syrian Directorate, while the area of Efqa was excavated by Jean Starcky and Jafar al-Hassani. The Palmyrene irrigation system was discovered in 2008 by Jørgen Christian Meyer who researched the Palmyrene countryside through ground inspections and satellite images. Most of Palmyra still remains unexplored especially the residential quarters in the north and south while the necropolis has been thoroughly excavated by the Directorate and the Polish expedition. Excavation expeditions left Palmyra in 2011 due to the Syrian Civil War.

See also
Aureliano in Palmira
Crisis of the Third Century
Palmyrene (Unicode block)
Thirty Tyrants (Roman)
Septimius Worod
Zabdas

Notes
References
Citations
Sources
External links

Metropolitan Museum of Art – Palmyra
Palmyra. Italian-Syrian Archaeological Mission of the University of Milan Archived 19 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine
Polish excavations in Palmyra.
Interactive 360° panoramas of Palmyra
360° full-screen photospheric visit of Palmyra
Tower Tombs, Funerary Portraiture Khan Academy
The legacy of ancient Palmyra, exhibition Getty.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 341
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palmyra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Palmyra peut faire référence à :

Toponyme
Palmyra est un nom de lieu notamment porté  par :

Syrie
le nom traduit dans plusieurs langues de Palmyre, une ville antique de Syrie.
Liban
. Hôtel Palmyra de Baalbeck

États-Unis
l'atoll Palmyra, un atoll de l'océan Pacifique Nord administré par le gouvernement fédéral ;
Palmyra (Illinois), un village du comté de Macoupin, en Illinois ;
Palmyra (Indiana), une ville située dans le comté de Harrison, dans l’État de l’Indiana ;
Palmyra, une ville dans l’État du Maine ;
Palmyra (Missouri), une ville du comté de Marion, dans le Missouri ;
Palmyra (Nebraska), un village situé dans le comté d'Otoe, dans l’État du Nebraska ;
Palmyra (New Jersey), une localité située dans le comté de Burlington, dans l’État du New Jersey ;
Palmyra Township 
Palmyra (New York), une petite ville dans le comté de Wayne, dans l'état de New York ;
Palmyra (village, New York), un village dans le comté de Wayne, dans l'état de New York ;
Palmyra (Pennsylvanie), un borough situé au centre du comté de Lebanon, en Pennsylvanie ;
Palmyra (Utah), une census-designated place située dans le comté d'Utah, dans l’État de l’Utah ;
Palmyra (Virginie), une census-designated place et le siège du comté de Fluvanna, dans l’État de Virginie ;
Palmyra (Wisconsin), in village du comté de Jefferson, dans l'État du Wisconsin.

Divers
Palmyra (jeu), un jeu vidéo créé en 1996 par Reiner Knizia, paru au aux éditions Editrice Giochi ;
Palmyra, un film de 1997 de Tatiana de Perlinghi avec Mia Van Roy ;
Palmyra, un film russe de 2022 ;
Palmyra (genre) (ou Palmyra Savigny, 1818), un genre de vers polychètes de la famille des Aphroditidae ;
(13131) Palmyra, un astéroïde de la ceinture principale d'astéroïdes.

Articles connexes
New Palmyra Project, un projet ayant pour but de reproduire l'ancienne ville de Palmyre dans un environnement virtuel et immersif en se basant sur des données et ressources archéologiques
East Palmyra (New York), un hameau dans le comté de Wayne, dans l'état de New York, aux États-Unis

Voir aussi
Palmira


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 1,986
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Palmyra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Palmyra was the only oasis in Syria and perhaps the only truly tourist town.
Palmyra (the Roman name) was known as Tadmor to the Syrians. Both meant the same thing - date palm.  The name came from the lush oasis adjacent to the city which was home to some million date palms.
Palmyra is listed as a UNESCO World Heritage site; all six Syrian UNESCO-listed heritage sites are 'endangered' as of 2013.

## Understand
Palmyra sat on the standard tourist trek around Syria. Intense competition for business amongst local outfits made the experience somewhat overwhelming to the traveller who had come from the North and had enjoyed a relatively 'quiet' trip thus far. The major tourist attraction of the area was the stunning ruins - the most famous and well-preserved of which were the Temple of Bel, the colonnade, the funerary towers, the hypogeum of 3 brothers, and the Arab castle. All were within a few kilometres of each other.
Much of this irreplaceable heritage was deliberately destroyed by ISIS during armed conflict in 2015. Although Syria's directorate of antiquities and museums makes hopeful statements about rebuilding at least part of the lost heritage using the original pieces, Palmyra is landmine-infested and no longer a tourist destination.
The Lion of Al-lāt was restored in 2017 and can now be found at the National Museum of Damascus.

## Get in
Palmyra was easily accessible from Damascus by bus departing the Harasta bus terminal.  Buses ran nearly hourly in both directions during the hours of daylight.  Buses also ran from Homs (150 km) and Deir-az-Zur.
For bike tourists, Palmyra was about a three-day trip from either Damascus or Deir-az-Zur. One needed to bring plenty of food as shops were few and far between; water was available at semi-regular intervals from police stations, military installations and at private houses on request.
As of April 2019, visitors need special permission to access Palmyra.

## Get around
The best method was to walk.  The town was not large and the historic site was built in a time when walking was the main form of transportation, so it was not too spread out. Bear in mind that the heat can be truly scorching; plan to visit at dusk and early morning to see magnificent sunrise and sunsets.
Camel rides were offered.
Tour buses abounded; locals did offer rides if you were willing to haggle.

## See
Many of the historic sites have been destroyed or severely damaged. Mines were removed by Russian forces in 2016-17, but there is no guarantee that all mines have been cleared.
34.550538.26871 Great Colonnade at Palmyra.      (updated Dec 2017)
34.5532738.2699812 Temple of Bel. Founded in 32 AD and dedicated to the Mesopotamian god Bel. While severely damaged in 2015 and the main building destroyed, its exterior walls and gate still stood.      (updated Dec 2017)
34.56263538.2571463 Palmyra Castle (قلعة فخر الدين المعني). A castle build by the Mamluks in the 13th century. While damaged in the conflict, the castle is still structurally intact.    (updated Dec 2017)
34.55058338.2687964 Roman Theatre at Palmyra.      (updated Dec 2017)
Funerary Towers. (updated Dec 2017)
Hypogeum of Three Brothers. (updated Dec 2017)
34.55529438.2748325 Palmyra Museum. Damaged during the Civil war and undergoing reconstruction in 2020. Some parts are open but the collections has been reduced to a bare minimum.    (updated Feb 2020)

## Do
Camel ride.
Camel race. If you visited Palmyra around October/November time you might have been lucky enough to be there for the week of camel racing.  This was an exciting day out, especially if you had gotten a lift in one of the many vehicles travelling round the track, alongside the camels.  There was a camel beauty competition and racing with and without riders - although it was recommended to go with someone who could explain what was going on.
Evening in the desert. Spend an evening in the desert, in a Bedouin tent with traditional music, food and wonderful hospitality - just ask at your hotel or your tour group leader.  After the ruins, this was definitely the highlight of any trip to Palmyra. A drive away from the ruins is a natural sulphuric water lake (take care as at certain times of the year it is pretty dried up!) and a camp site was nearby.
Sunrise and sunset view. Just outside of Palmyra, go for a walk up to the top of the sandstone cliffs at sunrise or sunset - truly stunning! You could have taken a taxi to Palmyra castle or walked  there.
34.55566838.274331 Hike and trail run. See the external link for the GPS track of the route. This loop ran from the middle of town up to Palmyra castle to view the sunrise or sunset. The first half of this loop was on sidewalk and paved road. The second half, descending from the castle, was on a trail going through the Great Colonnade.
34.5556938.273712 Run laps. See the external link for the GPS track of the route. The route was relatively short, so could be run several times to get more distance in. It was on a wide and well lit sidewalk. It was suitable even for a night run in December as it got dark early.

## Buy
There were no ATMs (that accepted international cards - there was one for Syrian cards) in Palmyra or even a full-service bank. Hotel Bel (on the main street) offered advances on Visa and MasterCard for a 20% commission. There was a local exchange office by the museum which changed foreign currency but did not change traveller's cheques. You would have needed to bring sufficient cash, Syrian pounds, US dollars, or euros for your time in Palmyra.
As usual, the Syrian Commercial Bank offered terrible rates and added commission. You'd have gotten a better deal by checking the rates online then changing with the shop owners in the Souq.
Souvenir shops abounded on the main street with all kinds of jewellery, handicrafts and other wares typical to the Bedouin places. Shopkeepers (in a town with few sources of income other than tourism) were masters in the art of making you part with as much money as possible, so it would have been wise to only carry as much money with you as you were willing to spend on souvenirs (and food - see below) to avoid being talked into spending all or most of the money you had for the rest of your trip in Syria. Typically souvenir shopping would happen around dinner, as many of the restaurants and shops were in the same main street and you would have happened to walk past them on your way to or from the hotels and restaurants.

## Eat
Traditional Palymra Restaurant -- very bad reputation, with several differently priced but identical menus, tendency to recycle uneaten food, etc.
New Palmyra Restaurant / Pancake House on the main street for most tourists, al-Quwatli. This was a traditional Palmyra restaurant - catering for the tourist hordes. The owner was well connected with an army of scouts corralling tourists into the restaurant. For the adventurous traveller, fake ISIC student cards were available for purchase for €7.50, although they are of poor quality and little use in the Middle East.
On the same street, several stands sold roast chicken.
On any of the main roads running north you would have found find falafel stands and small restaurants selling the typical range of Syrian fast food, bakeries selling sweet treats and plenty of convenience stores with drinks and snacks.

## Drink
The only bars in Palmyra were inside the hotels, such as the Cave Bar in the basement of the Ishtar Hotel.  The bar carried a good selection of local beers and wines and you could drink on the terrace of the hotel.

## Sleep
Due to the conflict it is unknown which, if any, of these hotels are in business.

## Budget
Al Faris Hotel, ☏ +963(955)865-545. By the entrance to the village, on the left. Very nice and clean place with big rooms and a nice owner. The owner (who spoke English) welcomed visitors with a watermelon and a tea and could provide a lift anywhere around with his car inexpensively.
The Sun Hotel, ☏ +963 31 591-1133, sunhotel-sy@hotmail.com. Just around the corner on the main street near the ruins end, this quiet backpacker joint had a great dorm on the roof and friendly, relaxed owners. Home cooking for all meals of the day (extra cost), very tasty. Double and Triple rooms were available with average bathrooms.
New Afqa Hotel. A good budget bet, was just around the corner from the tourist office. Staff were friendly and spoke English well. Rooms were clean with en suite bathrooms, heating, air conditioning and satellite TV.
Baal Shamen Hotel. Another backpacker favourite. Accommodation was more basic than at the New Afqa Hotel but the rooms were still clean and staff were friendly.

## Mid-range
Ishtar Hotel (the first one on the left side when you enter the main street coming from the ruins), ☏ +963 31 591-3073 (main), +963 944 318-068 (mobile), fax: +963 31 591-3260, ishtarhotel@hotmail.com. Was one of the best hotels in Palmyra with very reasonable prices - US$30 for a double room, US$20 for a single room including tax and breakfast. It had a nice cave bar in the basement where you could enjoy the local beers and the tasty red wine. Clean comfortable rooms with private bathrooms and AC in every room. The friendly owner Naim spoke fluent English and French, and was happy to help you about anything you needed in Palmyra. US$20.
[dead link] Bel Hotel, Jamal Abd Alnaseer St, ☏ +963 31 5912096, fax: +963 31 5912099, info@hotel-bel.com. Had a friendly family atmosphere; clean rooms with en-suite bathroom, satellite, fridge, air-con and heating. 24-hr hot water, Wi-Fi, and on-site restaurant were available.
Al Nakheel Hotel, ☏ +963 31 591-0744, fax: +963 31 591-6744, info@alnakheelhotel.net. Was a clean and very friendly hotel with comfortable beds and private bathrooms only a few minutes from the ruins.  Run by Mohammed and his brother Ahmed, Mohammed helped you in anyway he can to ensure you had a great time in Palmyra.
[dead link] Orient Hotel, ☏ +963(31)591-0131, fax: +963(31)591-0700, orienthotel@hotmail.com. Was in city centre, clean, with friendly staff and generous breakfast included. US$50 double occupancy.

## Splurge
Heliopolis Hotel, PO Box 75 (Main Street near Customs Square), ☏ +963 31 591-3921, fax: +963 31 591-3923, info@heliopolispalmyra.com. Had unobstructed views of the ruins, Internet service, traditional breakfast. US$100 double occupancy.

## Connect
In the main tourist area, the Hani Internet Café inside the Traditional Palmyra Restaurant charged a pricey S£50 for a half hour. This may have been negotiable in low season. An Internet café slightly north of the centre charged S£20 an hour but had irregular hours.

## Go next
Buses departed frequently for Damascus, Homs, and Deir-az-Zur.The bus station was a little under a kilometre away from the main street. Other destinations may have needed a private car.
If hiring a private car, you might have wanted to consider side trips to Qasr al-Heir ash-Sharki - a partially excavated Ummayad palace quite literally in the middle of nowhere - and Rasafa, originally a Roman city with heavy Byzantine influence, also used by the Ummayads before being destroyed in the Abbasid era.  Rasafa was also of interest as the stone it's built out of, more a quartz-like crystal instead of the usual granite or sandstone, made for a unique appearance.  This route led quite close to the Euphrates, where you could have been dropped off in Raqqa, Aleppo, or Hama.  Car hire was often pricey and the driver still had to get back to Palmyra.  Private tours were the real money maker in the Syrian tourism industry, so expect to pay as much as US$100 if you were heading for Aleppo or Hama or a bit less to Raqqa.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
TEMPLE OF BEL
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:28:55


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,240
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Temple_of_Bel
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Temple of Bel (Arabic: معبد بعل), sometimes also referred to as the "Temple of Baal", was an ancient temple located in Palmyra, Syria. The temple, consecrated to the Mesopotamian god Bel, worshipped at Palmyra in triad with the lunar god Aglibol and the sun god Yarhibol, formed the center of religious life in Palmyra and was dedicated in AD 32.  The temple would have been closed during the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire in a campaign against the temples of the East made by Maternus Cynegius, Praetorian Prefect of Oriens, between 25 May 385 to 19 March 388.      Its ruins were considered among the best preserved at Palmyra, until they were further destroyed by the Islamic State in August 2015. The arched main entrance into the temple is still intact, as well as its exterior walls and fortified gate.

History
The temple was built on a tell with stratification indicating human occupation that goes back to the third millennium BC. The area was occupied in pre-Roman periods with a former temple that is usually referred to as "the first temple of Bel" and "the Hellenistic temple". The walls of the temenos and propylaea were constructed in the late first and the first half of the second century AD. The names of three Greeks who worked on the construction of the temple of Bel are known through inscriptions, including an architect named Alexandras (Greek: Αλεξάνδρας). However, many Palmyrenes adopted Greco-Roman names and native citizens with the name Alexander are attested in the city.
The Temple of Bel was converted into a Christian church during the Byzantine Era. Parts of the structure were modified by Arabs in 1132 which preserved the structure and converted the Temple into a mosque. The enormous temple courtyard (approx. 200 x 200 meters) held mud-brick houses among the ruins, and served as a fortified citadel for the village of Palmyra (known as Tadmur during the 1100s). The mosque in the temple proper and the dwellings remained in use until the 1920s when Franco-Syrian archaeological missions cleared the temple grounds of its postclassical elements. Most of the Corinthian columns of the inner colonnades still showed pedestals where the statues of the benefactors stood. The temple was aligned along the eastern end of the Great Colonnade at Palmyra.

Architecture
The temple showed a remarkable synthesis of ancient Near Eastern and Greek cultures. The temple remains lay inside a large precinct lined by porticos. It had a rectangular shape and was oriented north–south. It was based on a paved court surrounded by a massive 205-metre (673 ft) long wall with a propylaeum. On a podium in the middle of the court was the actual temple building. The cella was entirely surrounded by a prostyle of Corinthian columns, only interrupted on the long side by an entrance gate with large steps leading from the court. The cella was unique in the fact that it had two inner sanctuaries, the north and south adytons, dedicated as the shrines of Bel and other local deities. The northern chamber was known for a bas-relief carving of the seven planets known to the ancients surrounded by the twelve signs of the Zodiac and the carvings of a procession of camels and veiled women. The cella was lit by two pairs of windows cut high in the two long walls. In three corners of the building stairwells could be found that led up to rooftop terraces.
In the court there were the remains of a basin, an altar, a dining hall, and a building with niches. And in the northwest corner lay a ramp along which sacrificial animals were led into the temple area. There were three monumental gateways, of which the entry was through the west gate.

Destruction
Syria's Director of Antiquities Maamoun Abdul Karim stated that ISIL was looking for treasures and "stores of gold" in the city.
On 30 August 2015, the Associated Press reported that ISIS had partially demolished the temple by explosives, citing eyewitness accounts. The bricks and columns were reported as lying on the ground and only one wall was reported as remaining, according to a Palmyra resident. The damage was also attested by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.
Syria's antiquities chief Maamoun Abdulkarim later stated that although there was an explosion within the temple's perimeter, "the basic structure is still standing". However, these reports were proved to be incorrect.
On August 31, 2015 the United Nations confirmed the temple's destruction after reviewing satellite imagery, "We can confirm destruction of the main building of the Temple of Bel as well as a row of columns in its immediate vicinity" reported by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR). The BBC issued a video report showing the satellite images and the destruction described by Einar Bjorgo, manager of UN Satellite Imaging (UNOSAT UNITAR).
The main entrance arch survived the destruction of the temple. The Institute for Digital Archaeology proposed that replicas of this arch be installed in Trafalgar Square, London and Times Square, New York City. It was later decided that instead of the temple's main entrance, the replica would be of part of the Monumental Arch.

Restoration
Following the recapture of Palmyra by the Syrian Army in March 2016, director of antiquities Maamoun Abdelkarim stated that the Temple of Bel, along with the Temple of Baalshamin and the Monumental Arch, will be rebuilt using the surviving remains. ISIL recaptured the city on 11 December, but the Syrian Army retook it on 2 March 2017.
In July 2017, the French company "Art Graphique et Patrimoine" travelled to Palmyra and scanned the Temple's rubble in order to create a plan for its restoration.

Digital Reconstructions
The destruction of the Temple of Bel coincided with a boom in digital documentation and reconstruction technologies, and motivated a number of research and digital heritage organizations to engage in reconstruction projects. As the temple had been a popular tourist destination in Syria for many years, a great many images existed which portrayed the temple from many angles and viewpoints, making it an ideal candidate for photogrammetric reconstruction. Wissam Wahbeh and Stephen Nebiker, Researchers at the University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland demonstrated this capability, created a 3D model using tourist images along with proprietary data held by photogrammetry pioneer Gabriele Fangi. The New Palmyra Project organized the donation of over 3,000 high resolution images and published the collection as open data on Flickr.com, which is ideal for reconstruction as the platform preserves image metadata enabling complex matching of images from multiple sources. A comprehensive version, featuring full resolution reconstructions of reliefs, frescoes, and finely detailed decorative features, along with the raw data, was later published by UC San Diego Data Scientist Scott McAvoy in the hopes of encouraging continued collaboration informing future reconstruction efforts.

Image gallery
See also
List of Ancient Roman temples

References
Bibliography
Becker, Jeffrey A. Temple of Bel. Smarthistory
Gates, Charkes (2003), Ancient cities: the archaeology of urban life in the Ancient Near East and Egypt, Greece and Rome, Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-01895-1
Kaizer, Ted (2002), The religious life of Palmyra: a study of the social patterns of worship in the Roman period, Franz Steiner Verlag, ISBN 978-3-515-08027-9
Cremin, Aedeen (2007), Archaeologica: The World's Most Significant Sites and Cultural Treasures, Frances Lincoln Ltd., ISBN 978-0-7112-2822-1

External links

Syrian embassy site with history of the site
Travel site with images
Temple of Bel, Palmyra Khan Academy



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
BOSRA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:29:03


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,680
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bosra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bosra (Arabic: بُصْرَىٰ, romanized: Buṣrā), formerly Bostra (Greek: Βόστρα) and officially called Busra al-Sham (Arabic: بُصْرَىٰ ٱلشَّام, romanized: Buṣrā al-Shām), is a town in southern Syria, administratively belonging to the Daraa District of the Daraa Governorate and geographically part of the Hauran region.
Bosra is an ancient city mentioned in 14th century BC Egyptian sources. A key Nabatean city, it became the prosperous provincial capital of the Roman province of Arabia Petraea following the dissolution of the Nabatean kingdom. With the advent of Christianity Bostra flourished as a Metropolitan Archbishopric under the jurisdiction of Eastern Orthodox Patriarchate of Antioch and All the East. It also became a Latin Catholic titular see and the episcopal see of a Melkite Catholic Archeparchy.
Throughout its history under various Muslim rulers the city maintained its strategic importance as Syria's southern gateway. It attracted attention from Damascus' rulers and was governed by various lords, serving as a hub for Islamic learning and endowments. However it declined into a village during the Ottoman era, only to be revitalized in the 20th century with the construction of the Hijaz railway and growing archaeological interest, later prompting tourism-focused development by the Syrian government. Today it is a major archaeological site and has been declared by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site.
According to the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) Bosra had a population of 19,683 in the 2004 census. It is the administrative center of the nahiyah ("subdistrict") of Bosra, which consisted of nine localities with a total population of 33,839 in 2004. Bosra's inhabitants are predominantly Sunni Muslim, although the town has a small Shia Muslim community.

History
Bosra was the first Nabatean city in the 2nd century BC. The Nabatean Kingdom was conquered by Cornelius Palma, a general of Trajan, in 106 AD.
According to John Malalas it was called Bostra (Ancient Greek: Βόστρα) after Bostras, a Roman general who was dispatched to the country.

Roman period
Under the Roman Empire Bosra was renamed Nova Trajana Bostra and was the residence of the legio III Cyrenaica. It was made capital of the Roman province of Arabia Petraea. The city flourished and became a major metropolis at the juncture of several trade routes, in particular the Via Traiana Nova, a Roman road that connected Damascus to the Red Sea. It became an important centre for food production and during the reign of Emperor Philip the Arab Bosra began to mint its own coins. The two Councils of Arabia were held at Bosra in 246 and 247 AD.  The Babylonian Talmud and Jerusalem Talmud mention Bosra as a town on the border outside Israel, but with a sizeable Jewish population. In the Jerusalem Talmud, it states that Resh Lakish was in Bosra when he saw them sprinkling water to the goddess Aphrodite.  In the Babylonian Talmud, tractate Avoda Zara (58b) it likewise mentions how Resh Lakish interacted with the population in Bosra. There are also rabbis who were identified as the sage from Bosra, such as Rabbi Jonah of Bosra.  The Talmud (Shabbat 29b) also notes that there was a synagogue in Bosra.

Byzantine period
By the Byzantine period, which began in the 5th century, Christianity had become the dominant religion in Bosra (Βόσρα in Greek-Byzantine). The city became a Metropolitan archbishop's seat (see below) and a large cathedral was built in the 6th century. Bosra was conquered by the Sasanian Persians in the early 7th century but was recaptured during the Byzantine reconquest.

Islamic era
Bosra played an important part in the early life of Muhammad, as described in the entry for the Christian monk Bahira. The forces of the Rashidun Caliphate under general Khalid ibn al-Walid captured the city from the Byzantines in the Battle of Bosra in 634. Throughout Islamic rule Bosra would serve as the southernmost outpost of Bilad al-Sham, its prosperity being mostly contingent on the political importance of that city. Bosra held additional significance as a centre of the pilgrim caravan between Damascus and the Muslim holy cities of Mecca and Medina, the destinations of the annual hajj pilgrimage. Early Islamic rule did not alter the general architecture of Bosra, with only two structures dating to the Umayyad era (721 and 746) when Damascus was the capital of the Caliphate. As Bosra's inhabitants gradually converted to Islam the Roman-era holy sites were utilized for Muslim practices. In the 9th century, Ya'qubi wrote that Bosra was the capital of the Hauran province.

After the end of the Umayyad era in 750, major activity in Bosra ceased for around 300 years until the late 11th century. In the last years of Fatimid rule, in 1068, a number of building projects were commissioned. With the advent of Seljuk rule in 1076 increasing focus was paid to Bosra's defences. In particular the Roman theatre was transformed into a fortress, with a new floor added to the interior staircase tower. With the coming to power of the Burid dynasty in Damascus, the general Kumushtakin was allotted the entireHauran plain as a fief by the atabeg Tughtakin. Under Kumushtakin, efforts to enhance the Muslim nature of the city increased with the construction of a number of Islamic edifices. One of these projects was the restoration of the Umari Mosque, which had been built by the Umayyads in 721. Another mosque commissioned was the smaller al-Khidr Mosque at the northwestern part of the city, which was established under Kumushtakin in 1134. Kumushtakin also had a madrasa constructed alongside the Muslim shrine honoring the mabrak an-naqa ("camel's knees"), which marked the imprints of the camel the prophet Muhammad rode on when he entered Bosra in the early 7th century. In 1147 King Baldwin III of Jerusalem led a Crusader force to capture the city but his attempt was thwarted since the Damascene army led by Mu'in ad-Din Unur managed to garrison Bosra's citadel.
A golden age of political and architectural activity in Bosra began during the reign of Ayyubid sultan al-Adil I (1196–1218). One of the first architectural developments in the city was the construction of eight large external towers in the Roman theatre-turned-fortress. The project began in 1202 and was completed in 1253, towards the end of the Ayyubid period. The two northern corner towers alone occupied more space than the remaining six. After al-Adil's death in 1218 his son as-Salih Ismail inherited the fief of Bosra and lived in its newly fortified citadel. During Ismail's rule Bosra gained political prominence. Ismail used the city as his base when he claimed the sultanate in Damascus on two separate occasions, reigning between 1237–38 and 1239–45.

Ottoman era
In 1596 Bosra appeared in the Ottoman tax registers as Nafs Busra, being part of the nahiyah of Bani Nasiyya in the Qada of Hauran. It had a Muslim population consisting of 75 households and 27 bachelors, and a Christian population of 15 households and 8 bachelors. Taxes were paid on wheat, barley, summer crops, fruit- or other trees,  goats and/or beehives and water mill.
When James Silk Buckingham visited Bosra in 1816, he described "a large ruined edifice, which was originally an oblong square, with one semicircular end," containing "a miserable work of the Greek Christians, by whom it was no doubt used as a place of worship up to the period of its destruction." He also noted "an old building, with a high square tower attached to it… with many Arabic inscriptions in different parts of it," as well as another plain building "with crosses sculptured in the doors and walls, and the whole appearance that of an early place of Christian worship." Among the structures of Bosra he was shown was the Serait-el-Bint-el-Yahoodi or "Palace of the Jew's Daughter," though he could not "learn the origin of this name, or obtain an account of any tradition connected with it." He remarked further on the El-Hamam bath, with pointed arches in alternating black and white stone, and on "a large building entirely constructed out of the ruins of more ancient edifices," containing "Cufic, Arabic, and Greek" inscriptions and "a mixture of antiquity and freshness, of wealth and poverty, of skill and ignorance." He described ascending a great square tower of sixty-four steps, with stone doors on its stages and an open space at the top, from which "we enjoyed a commanding view of the ruins of Bosra." Buckingham also saw "a Roman arched gateway, not unlike that of Jerash," Corinthian colonnades standing in the town's streets, and the castle of Bosra, which he thought showed "a mixture of styles which rendered it exceedingly difficult to say in what age or by what people they were constructed," containing Roman sculpture and Arabic inscriptions dated to 722 AH.
According to the 1914 Ottoman population statistics, the district of Busra had a total population of 26.355, consisting of 22.485 Muslims, 3.096 Orthodox Greeks, 594 Catholic Greeks, and 180 Protestants.

Modern era
Today Bosra is a major archaeological site, containing ruins from Roman, Byzantine and Muslim times, its main feature being the well-preserved Roman theatre. Every year a national music festival is held in the main theatre.
Significant social and economic changes have affected Bosra since the end of the French Mandate in 1946. Whereas until the 1950s the shopkeepers of Bosra were from Damascus, since then most have lived in the town. In the late Ottoman era and the French Mandate period the agricultural relationship was between the small landowner and the sharecroppers, but since the agrarian reforms in the late 1950s and 1960s the relevant relationship has been between the landowners and the wage laborers. Many of its residents have found work in the Gulf Cooperation Council states, sending the proceeds to their relatives in Bosra. Social changes and increased access to education have largely diminished traditional clan life according to historian Hanna Batatu.
During the presidency of Hafez al-Assad (1970–2000), Bosra and the surrounding villages were largely free of government interference and for the most part were politically dominated by members of the prominent al-Mokdad clan, who served as intermediaries of sorts between the residents of the town and the governor of Daraa and the Ba'ath Party branch secretary.
On 14 October 2012, there was intense gunfire from government forces stationed at checkpoints on the main road running through the town. On 13 November 2012, fierce fighting was reported in the east of the town. By January 2013, after 22 months of conflict during the ongoing Syrian Civil War, some refugees fleeing Bosra were speaking of escalating violence, with many bodies being left in the streets. On 15 January 2013, it was reported that the citadel was used by the army to shell the town on a daily basis. After the beginning of February 2014 the city was under the control of the Syrian Army. However on 31 January 2015, the Army's 5th Division confronted a contingent from the rebels near the famous Roman theatre – fierce firefights broke out between the groups. On 1 February 2015, the Army forces shelled areas in the east of the town. On 25 March 2015, Syrian rebels seized the town, ousting Syrian soldiers and allied militiamen after four days of intense battle.
Bosra was recaptured by the Syrian Arab Army on 2 July 2018 following the surrender of the rebel forces. The recapture was a part of the Daraa Offensive, which involved the surrender and/or reconciliation of many rebel groups in the area.

Landmarks
Of the city that once counted 80,000 inhabitants there remains today only a village among the ruins. The 2nd-century Roman theatre of Bosra, constructed probably under Trajan, is the only monument of this type with its upper gallery in the form of a covered portico fully preserved. It was fortified between 481 and 1231.
There are also Nabatean and Roman monuments, Christian churches, mosques, and Madrasahs within the half-ruined enceinte of the city. The structure of the cathedral, a central plan with eastern apses flanked by two sacristies, exerted a decisive influence on the evolution of Christian architectural forms and to a certain extent on Islamic style. Al-Omari Mosque of Bosra is one of the oldest surviving mosques in Islamic history.
Close by are the Kharaba Bridge and the Gemarrin Bridge, both Roman bridges.

Climate
Bosra has a cold semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification BSk). Rainfall is higher in winter than in summer. The average annual temperature in Bosra is 16.4 °C (61.5 °F). About 247 mm (9.72 in) of precipitation falls annually.

Demographics
In the late 1990s, Bosra had an estimated population of 12,000. Its population increased to 19,683 according to the 2004 census by the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics. The population of its metropolitan area was 33,839.
Bosra's inhabitants are predominantly Sunni Muslims and are mostly divided between seven major clans. The leading clan is the al-Miqdad whose members immigrated to Bosra from al-Suwayda in the mid-18th-century. During this era they also dominated the nearby villages of Ghasm, Maaraba and Samaqiyat. However, the oldest clan of Bosra are the Hamd, a largely fair-skinned people, many members of which have blond hair and blue eyes. They claim to be descendants of the ancient Roman governor of Bosra, although other townspeople believe they are of Crusader origins. Regarding land ownership, the Hamd clan owns around 1,000 hectares in the town while the al-Miqdad clan owns roughly 12,000. The latter's members were historically influential in the Hauran region and beyond, having had one of their own in the Ottoman parliament of Abdul Hamid II in Constantinople during the Young Turks period and in the Syrian parliament during the French Mandate period. As of the late 1990s, members of the al-Miqdad clan occupied the positions of mayor, the chief imam of the main al-Omari Mosque, the chief of the town's bureau of antiquities as well as manager of Bosra's carpet workshop and the owner of the principal coffeehouse. While their members traditionally resided in the eastern quarter of old Bosra, they are currently prevalent throughout the town.
Bosra also has a small Shia Muslim community of some fifty families. According to Palestinian American historian Hanna Batatu, the Shia inhabitants of Bosra were "relatively recent arrivals" and immigrated to the town from the city of Nabatieh in South Lebanon. Most of the working members of the Shia community are artisans or laborers. Batatu also asserts that social changes in Bosra since Syrian independence have led to tribal diffusion, with intermarriage between the clans and between the Sunni and Shia communities having increased significantly.

Notable people
Saint Timon the Deacon, 1st century, Christian proto-deacon and bishop of Bosra
Beryllus of Bostra, 3rd century, Bishop
Shimon ben Lakish, 3rd century, amora of the second generation and rabbi
Titus of Bostra, fl. 4th century, Christian theologian
Saint Antipater of Bostra, fl. 5th century, Christian bishop
Bahira, c. 600, Assyrian monk
Ibn Kathir (1301–1373), Islamic scholar

References
Sources
Batatu, H. (1999). Syria's Peasantry, the Descendants of Its Lesser Rural Notables, and Their Politics. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691002541.
Beattie, Andrew; Pepper, Timothy (2001). The Rough Guide to Syria. Rough Guides. ISBN 9781858287188.
Buckingham, James Silk (1825). Travels among the Arab tribes inhabiting the countries east of Syria and Palestine. London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green.
Hütteroth, W.-D.; Abdulfattah, K. (1977). Historical Geography of Palestine, Transjordan and Southern Syria in the Late 16th Century. Erlanger Geographische Arbeiten, Sonderband 5. Erlangen, Germany: Vorstand der Fränkischen Geographischen Gesellschaft. ISBN 3-920405-41-2.*Meinecke, M. (1996). Patterns of Stylistic Changes in Islamic Architecture: Local Traditions Versus Migrating Artists. New York University Press. ISBN 9780814754924.
Smail, R. C. (1956). Crusading Warfare 1097-1193. New York: Barnes & Noble Books. ISBN 1-56619-769-4. {{cite book}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Strange, le, G. (1890). Palestine Under the Moslems: A Description of Syria and the Holy Land from A.D. 650 to 1500. Committee of the Palestine Exploration Fund.

External links

Catholic Encyclopedia on Bosra
Official website of Bosra city
Extensive photo site about Bosra
Photo Gallery of Bosra
GCatholic Latin titular see
Map of the town, Google Maps
Bosra-map; 22M
Eastern Orthodox Archdiocese of Bosra, Horan and Jabal al-Arab
Brief History of the Archdiocese of Bosra-Hauran


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 4,874
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bosra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bosra (parfois Bostra, en arabe بصرى) est une ville du sud de la Syrie, ancienne capitale de la région du Hauran, dans le gouvernorat de Deraa. Située dans une région très fertile, au débouché des caravanes venant d’Arabie, Bosra connut la prospérité et joua un important rôle commercial, comptant jusqu’à 50 000 habitants.
Jadis capitale de la province romaine d'Arabie, très tôt christianisée, Bosra devint une étape importante sur l'ancienne route caravanière de La Mecque. Elle conserve, enserrés dans ses épaisses murailles, un théâtre romain du IIe siècle, des ruines paléochrétiennes et plusieurs mosquées plus tardives.
Bosra est inscrite au Patrimoine mondial de l'UNESCO.

La ville moderne
La ville actuelle s'est développée sur les vestiges de la cité ancienne qui était à peu près dépeuplée il y a un siècle.
Selon le Bureau central syrien des statistiques (CBS), Bosra comptait 19 683 habitants lors du recensement de 2004. C'est le centre administratif du nahiyah (« sous-district ») de Bosra, qui comprenait neuf localités et comptait une population totale de 33 839 habitants en 2004. Les habitants de Bosra sont majoritairement musulmans sunnites, bien que la ville abrite une petite communauté musulmane chiite.

Histoire
Située à 141 km de Damas, au cœur de la région fertile du Hauran, sur un plateau basaltique, Bosra entre dans l’histoire à l’époque hellénistique. Ses roches noires, employées dans la construction depuis des siècles, confèrent à la région entière beaucoup d'originalité. De plus, la dureté du basalte a permis aux monuments de résister à l'usure.
La ville est mentionnée pour la première fois dans des archives égyptiennes en 1350 av. J.-C. sous le nom de Busrana, mais ne se développe réellement qu'à partir du IIe siècle av. J.-C. Selon François Villeneuve, aux IIIe et IIe siècles av. J.-C., l'État nabatéen se bâtit et sort progressivement de l'ombre. « Pétra se construit peu à peu et les Nabatéens poussent leurs incursions de plus en plus loin vers le nord, jusque dans la région de Bosra en Syrie. » Sous les rois Arétas III et Arétas IV, elle tombe sous la coupe des Nabatéens. À cette époque, elle devient une capitale régionale de la Nabatène, titre qui lui sera accordé officiellement au Ier siècle sous Rabbel II.
En 106, elle devient la capitale de la province romaine d’Arabie créée par Trajan après l’annexion de la Nabatène. Étant sur le principal axe de communication, la Via Nova Trajana, elle bénéficie de cette position et de l’installation de 5000 légionnaires : Bosra devint assez rapidement la garnison définitive de la legio III Cyrenaica. Agrandie et embellie d'édifices publics, organisée autour d'un cardo et d'un decumanus, elle est rebaptisée Nova Trajana Bostra sous Trajan, entre 98 et 117. Au cours du même siècle, on y construit le grand théâtre de 17 000 places, un des plus vastes de l’Orient romain, demeuré presque intact jusqu'à nos jours.
Dès le début du IIIe siècle, le christianisme, en pleine expansion, va changer le paysage urbain : de nombreuses églises sont bâties, ainsi qu'une cathédrale dédiée aux saints Serge, Bacchus et Léonce.
Pour la tradition musulmane, c’est à Bosra que le moine chrétien nestorien Bahira aurait reconnu Mahomet, alors âgé de dix ans, qui accompagnait son oncle "Abou Talib", comme étant le paraclet annoncé dans l'évangile de Jean. Après la conquête musulmane de Bosra en 632, la région devient le champ de bataille des musulmans et des byzantins, qui se disputent le contrôle de la Syrie. Trente-six mosquées, dont la mosquée El Omari, sont construites, de nombreux chrétiens sont obligés de se convertir. Les Seldjoukides, gouvernant la ville à partir de la fin du XIe siècle ap. J.-C., y rétablissent la prospérité, et la protègent des Croisés.
Les Ayyoubides font du théâtre romain, fortifié par Nour Ed Din, une véritable citadelle, qui sera ensuite conquise par les Mongols, mais le sultan turc Baybars la restaure en 1261. La ville demeure pour une longue période un passage obligatoire des pèlerins musulmans. Puis Bosra décline, au point de n'être plus qu'un simple village jusqu'à nos jours. Pendant le Mandat français, des cavaliers autochtones sous commandement français, dégagent et restituent l'axe de la Via Recta qui traverse le site. Ces premières restitutions sont inaugurées par le président de la république de l’État de Syrie, Sheikh Tajeddine el-Hassani (Damas 1885-1943). Par la suite, plusieurs campagnes de fouilles archéologiques ont été menées, principalement sur le monumental théâtre romain, le plus vaste et le mieux préservé du Moyen-Orient, inscrivant Bosra sur les circuits du tourisme moderne. Les habitants de la vieille ville, dont certains vivaient même dans des habitats de construction romaine, sont peu à peu relogés dans de nouveaux quartiers.

La ville est prise par les rebelles le 25 mars 2015, lors de la guerre civile syrienne. Le 29 juin 2018, des tirs d'artillerie de l'Armée Syrienne endommagent partiellement le théâtre.

Site archéologique
Enceinte et fortifications
Le rempart au nord-ouest
La portion de l'enceinte urbaine qui s’étend vers le nord à partir de la porte ouest et conduit au camp romain a été fouillée, puis restaurée au cours des années 1990. Un tronçon en appareil pseudo-isodome à bossages a été mis au jour, du même type que celui du rempart de Suweidâ’. Une tour rectangulaire saillante a été relevée.

Le rempart de la ville au sud-ouest
Le rempart de la ville au sud-ouest est visible à partir de la porte ouest « Bâb al Hawâ’ » en direction du sud. Les tronçons sont construits en gros appareil non taillé pouvant remonter à des périodes anciennes. Un sondage de 2001 a permis d’identifier un premier état de l'enceinte, datable de l’époque du Bronze Moyen II. Ce rempart a été reconstruit au tournant de l'ère chrétienne, à l’époque de la céramique nabatéenne et de la céramique sigillée orientale. Il a connu une nouvelle phase reconstruction à l’époque byzantine, vers le VIe siècle.

Le rempart nord et est
Dans la large rue qui constitue actuellement la limite nord de la vieille ville et suit le tracé sud du camp romain, une tranchée creusée pour installer une canalisation a permis d’observer plusieurs niveaux de circulation en cailloutis, puis en dalles de basalte qui appartenait à une rue dallée, sans doute de direction est-ouest, datant au plus tôt du Ve siècle.

Théâtre, amphithéâtre, cirque
Le théâtre romain et la citadelle arabe
Après la prise de la ville, en 106 après J.-C., les Romains ont presque aussitôt entrepris la construction du théâtre. On suppose qu'il a été achevé sous Trajan, mort en 117.
Le décor de la scaenae frons est certainement d’époque sévérienne, mais le théâtre a dû rester en construction une bonne partie du IIe siècle, à en juger par le style des chapiteaux de la colonnade qui orne le sommet de la cavea.
En 635, Bosra tombe aux mains des Arabes et le théâtre romain trouve un usage défensif. À partir de la fin du XIe siècle, et jusqu'au milieu du XIIe, le théâtre subit une métamorphose radicale : l'édifice est transformé en une solide forteresse qui doit protéger cet important centre de commerce et son réseau routier. Le théâtre est renforcé, comblé et entouré de constructions militaires : recouvert de toutes parts, il restera caché au monde durant sept siècles.

Les tours nord et nord-ouest de la citadelle ont été restaurées au cours des années 1930. Les diverses maisons installées à l’intérieur furent détruites et, en 1947, la restauration des monuments fut confiée à Sleiman Mukdad, qui élabora un plan général de la ville antique et fit le recensement des monuments nécessitant des travaux. Son œuvre la plus importante est le dégagement des deux niveaux de constructions voûtées qui occupaient l'ensemble de la cavea du théâtre.

Comme maire de Bosra, Sleiman Mukdad participa à la conception des quartiers modernes pour reloger les familles qui avaient été déplacées à la suite de l’évacuation du site archéologique.
Un festival biennal de spectacles de musique et de danse a été créé au théâtre antique en 1980.

Les musées de la citadelle
Un dépôt lapidaire créé en 1933 est à l'origine des collections actuelles de l'antiquarium de la citadelle, augmentées de statues gréco-romaines et d'inscriptions nabatéennes, grecques, latines et arabes.

Le cirque (« hippodrome »)
Le cirque, du IIe ou IIIe siècle ap. J.-C., apparaît clairement sur les photos aériennes. Il est situé à l'extérieur de la ville, au sud et à proximité du théâtre. Le bâtiment, qui mesure un peu plus de 440 m de long et environ 130 m de large, a été dégagé. Il est très ruiné : seuls subsistent des murs et soutènements de gradins. L'ensemble peut être observé depuis l'espace central.

L’amphithéâtre
Un grand bâtiment elliptique de 120 × 65 m est visible sur les vues aériennes : c'est l'amphithéâtre, presque entièrement arasé, mais discernable grâce aux campagnes de fouilles effectuées sur les fondations depuis la fin du XIXe siècle. Une partie du mur extérieur a été dégagée. L'amphithéâtre se trouve juste au nord du cirque et à l'ouest du théâtre, formant avec ceux-ci un vaste ensemble consacré aux spectacles.

Sources, aqueducs, réservoirs, thermes, hammams
Le réservoir Est « birket an-Nabatiyah »
Ce réservoir, appelé aussi « réservoir des Nabatéens », est construit à ciel ouvert, tout comme le réservoir sud-est « birket al-Hâjj ». Une canalisation rejoignait le réservoir à l'angle sud-est pour l’alimentation en eau de la ville.

Le réservoir sud-est « birket al-Hâjj »
Les deux grands réservoirs d'eau sont distants d'environ 500 m. Ils sont de forme carrée, d'environ 150 m de côté, entourés de quais et de bordures de pierre où figurent des inscriptions en écriture nabatéenne qui les rendent tous deux datables du Ier siècle.
Les deux réservoirs ont été déblayés de 1960 à 1975, puis rénovés en 1986-1987.

La retenue d’eau du quartier de l'Ouest (prétendue « naumachie »)
On observe dans quartier de l’Ouest une vaste dépression en fer à cheval dont le fond humide et fertile a été transformé en cultures, limitée à l’ouest par un mur en appareil cyclopéen dans sa partie sud, et en appareil quadrangulaire à bossages dans la partie centrale. Selon Butler, il s’agirait d’un aménagement pour les jeux nautiques (naumachies) ; d’après Peters, cet espace servait de stockage pour les marchandises et le bétail. Cet espace est toujours utilisé pour des cultures maraîchères irriguées naturellement. Il se trouve sur la ligne qui descend du secteur de la source pérenne de la ville, au nord.

Le hammam Manjak
Ce hammam mamelouk, construit par l’émir Manjak en 1372, est l’un des bâtiments les plus luxueux de la Bosra islamique. Le bâtiment est placé le long de la rue nord-sud, en face de la Grande Mosquée. Le complexe allongé s’articule en fonction de la suite fonctionnelle des opérations du bain. À la pièce d’accueil au sud succèdent vers le nord plusieurs salles de bains et, derrière elles, les installations techniques avec les réservoirs d’eau et le chauffage. L’organisation du plan, les techniques de construction et les détails stylistiques rapprochent le hamman Manjak des bains mamelouks de Damas.

Le camp romain et ses thermes
Le camp est datable par une borne mentionnant la légion IIIa Cyrenaica (IGLS XIII, 9449) et de nombreux blocs sculptés épars d’époque romaine impériale et byzantine. La légion VIa Ferrata s'est installée à Bostra en 106, suivie de la IIIa Cyrenaica vers 125.
L’existence du camp légionnaire a été parfois mise en doute, mais sa localisation au nord-est de la ville moderne a été établie dans les années 1970 par les travaux de Sleiman Mukdad. L’estimation des dimensions du camp est rendue difficile par les champs cultivés. Certains murs modernes semblent reproduire assez fidèlement le tracé des murs antiques, mais ceux-ci sont toujours masqués par l’accumulation des pierres. Les dimensions approximatives du camp peuvent être estimées à 440 m d’est en ouest et 350 m du nord au sud. Sa superficie serait donc d’environ 15,40 ha, alors que la superficie des autres camps légionnaires peut atteindre 25 à 27 ha, pour une moyenne de 20 ha. Bostra est donc un des camps légionnaires les plus petits du monde romain, mais proche par sa surface de camps de Pannonie et de Germanie inférieure.

Thermes du camp romain
Au sud-ouest sont visibles les vestiges des thermes du camp et, au nord, la porte du camp, dégagée d’abord par Sleiman Mukdad dans les années 1970, puis par l’équipe archéologique française entre 1997 et 2001. Cette porte est large de 2,70 m ; elle est munie de deux piédroits en appareil de pierre de taille soigné, comportant des remplois. Le passage est encadré par deux tours rectangulaires, saillantes de 5 m par rapport aux piédroits, qui délimitent un passage antérieur large de 5 m.

La source al-Jahîr
La source al-Jahîr, située près de l’angle sud-ouest du camp romain, est une source pérenne située à 6 m de profondeur. C’est la source la plus importante de Bosra, qui explique probablement l’ancienneté et la permanence de l’occupation humaine sur ce site. Elle a sans doute été aménagée depuis l’Antiquité. Deux bassins bordés de hauts murs sont visibles actuellement. Des escaliers permettent d’accéder au niveau de l'eau. L’ensemble du secteur fait l’objet de restaurations et de réaménagements urbains.

Voirie
La « rue du théâtre »
Cette voie monumentale, dallée et bordée de colonnes, relie la rue principale est-ouest à la zone du théâtre et de l'amphithéâtre. Elle est bien conservée, datable du IIIe siècle.

La rue principale est-ouest, entre arc nabatéen et tétrapyle
La rue principale de Bosra est une voie monumentale qui traverse toute la ville d'est en ouest, depuis l’arc nabatéen jusqu'à la porte Ouest « Bâb al-Hawâ’ ». Cette rue constituait l’axe majeur de la ville, sans doute bien avant l’époque nabatéenne. À l’époque sévérienne (première moitié du IIIe siècle), cette voie principale prend la forme d'un decumanus monumental, avec une chaussée dallée bordée de trottoirs protégés du soleil et des intempéries par des portiques à colonnades ioniques, sur lesquelles s'ouvraient les boutiques, les thermes et les espaces publics des marchés. Les intersections avec les rues nord-sud sont marquées par des aménagements monumentaux comme l’arc central et la place ronde ornée d'un tétrapyle d'une architecture complexe, comparable à ceux de Palmyre et Jerash.

La rue du sud au nord, du nymphée vers la mosquée d'Omar
Partant du sud (carrefour de l'exèdre et du nymphée), cette rue monumentale, dégagée dans les années 1990, a conservé son dallage antique disposé en oblique. Elle desservait les deux entrées des thermes du nord. Ses deux portiques d'ordre ionique abritaient des files de boutiques.

La rue nord-sud coupant la place du tétrapyle
Cette rue datant de l'époque romaine impériale n'a guère été fouillée, mais son tracé est connu : elle joignait la place du tétrapyle à la source principale de la ville au nord. Vers le sud, à partir de la place du tétrapyle, elle conduit à l’amphithéâtre. Elle était probablement bordée de portiques ioniques d’époque sévérienne, comme la rue principale.

La rue principale est-ouest du tétrapyle à la porte ouest « Bâb al-Hawâ’ »
Depuis la place du tétrapyle, la rue principale mène à la porte ouest « Bâb al-Hawâ’ ». La chaussée pavée antique est bordée de trottoirs, autrefois abrités par des portiques à colonnades ioniques.

La rue est-ouest, de la rue nord-sud à la mosquée de Fâtima
Cette rue antique d’époque romaine, qui joignait les quartiers nord-ouest et nord-est de Bosra, a été dégagée sur une portion limitée, au croisement avec la rue nord-sud et au nord de l’îlot des thermes du centre.

La rue sud-nord de la mosquée d’Omar au camp romain
Cette rue, datée de l’époque romaine à l’époque médiévale, est le prolongement de la rue joignant le nymphée au camp romain, au nord du carrefour avec la rue est-ouest. Le tracé d’origine de cette rue est très probablement d’époque romaine. Les superstructures datent vraisemblablement de l’époque sévérienne.

Décor urbain
L'arc nabatéen et les massifs à demi-colonnes nabatéennes
Ce monument de conception romaine, datable du Ier siècle apr. J.-C., marque la limite entre deux secteurs de la ville. L’arc unique repose sur quatre piles rectangulaires. L'ensemble est orné de pilastres, niches et demi-colonnes. Le style des chapiteaux du niveau médian se rattache au style des façades rupestres nabatéennes de Pétra. Un fronton, disparu, couronnait le bâtiment sur ses deux faces.
L’arc nabatéen à l’est et la porte ouest (ou « Bâb al-Hawâ’ », porte des Vents) ont été restaurés de 1955 à 1968 par Sleiman Mukdad.

Le nymphée (dit autrefois « kalybé »)
Le nymphée (dit autrefois « kalybé », forme locale de petit temple), aisément repérable par ses deux colonnes corinthiennes jointes par une pièce d'entablement très décorée, est une fontaine monumentale dont on a retrouvé deux bassins et des arrivées d'eau. La datation du monument est rendue difficile par les remplois successifs et les tremblements de terre, mais les archéologues proposent une construction en trois phases, des années 100 à 300 ap. J.-C. environ.

L'exèdre monumentale (dite autrefois « nymphée »)
Cette construction du IIe siècle, qui présente quatre colonnes en façade et une abside centrale en arrière-plan, flanquée de deux murs droits, est située à l'angle d'un des grands carrefours de la ville. Plutôt qu'une fontaine monumentale, l'édifice du IIe siècle semble avoir eu une fonction cultuelle. Il s'agirait dans ce cas d'un temple dédié à une divinité importante liée à la politique romaine.

L’arc central « Bâb al-Qandîl »
Cet arc, en réalité un octopyle datant de Philippe l'Arabe (milieu du IIIe siècle), marquait l'entrée dans la rue du théâtre. Il est aujourd'hui réduit à sa façade nord..

Le cryptoportique
Le cryptoportique est une galerie voûtée rectiligne de la période romaine, établie sous l'un des deux portiques de la rue principale est-ouest, côté nord, entre l'entrée du marché (macellum) et la place du tétrapyle, de manière à compenser la déclivité du terrain en cet endroit. La galerie, longue de 108 m et large de 5 m, se terminait aux deux extrémités par une abside, celle de l’extrémité ouest se trouvant partiellement détruite afin de laisser place au tétrapyle.

Le tétrapyle et la place ronde
Le tétrapyle de Bosra est assez semblable à ceux de Jerash et de Palmyre : c'est un monument décoratif du IVe siècle, formé de quatre piliers, chacun d'eux étant constitué de quatre colonnes, au milieu d'une place ronde aménagée au carrefour de la rue principale est-ouest et de la rue sud-nord qui conduit à la source principale. Il ne subsiste de cet ensemble architectural que les soubassements des piliers et des fragments de chapiteaux corinthiens.

La porte ouest ou porte des Vents « Bâb al-Hawâ’ »
La porte, très simple, aux piliers ornés de deux niches, est percée à travers le rempart, à l'extrémité ouest de l'axe principal. Elle date probablement du IIIe siècle.
De 1955 à 1968, Sleiman Mukdad consacra ses efforts à la rénovation de l’arc nabatéen à l’est et de la porte Ouest (« Bâb al-Hawâ’ », porte des Vents).

Forum, marché, bâtiments publics
Le forum et le marché (macellum)
Le forum, au nord du cryptoportique, est une grande place dallée qui n'a guère livré que quelques fragments de chapiteaux et autres éléments architecturaux d'un portique.
Le marché s'étend à l'est du forum : les fouilles ont révélé un bâtiment de plan octogonal, agrémenté de colonnes, certaines se trouvant murées à la suite d'une conversion en maison d'habitation.

La basilique de Bahîra et son annexe
L'édifice basilical du IIe – IIIe siècle, dit « de Bahîra », d'après le nom d'un moine nestorien, est situé au nord de l’église des saints Serge, Bacchus et Léonce. D'usage inconnu, il comportait, à l’origine, une façade s’ouvrant par un arc sur un atrium à colonnes surmontées de chapiteaux ioniques. Il reste une partie de l’abside en cul-de-four.
Un bâtiment parallèle, au nord de la basilique, conserve une abside au décor élaboré, constitué de quatre niches à frontons et coquilles. Cette abside est incorporée dans une maison moderne.

Thermes, bains
Les thermes du Centre (« Khân ad-Dibs »)
Très vaste établissement des IIe et IIIe siècles au point central dans la ville, en usage jusqu'à l'époque byzantine, les thermes du Centre occupaient un vaste rectangle de 105 × 65 m, bordé de boutiques. Ils proposaient des salles thermales et des exercices sportifs, comme partout ailleurs dans l'Empire romain, avec un parcours de pièces froides, tièdes et chaudes, trois palestres, des portiques et autres exèdres et niches décoratives.

Les thermes du Sud
Les thermes du Sud sont situés sur la rue principale, entre le palais « de Trajan » et la zone du théâtre. Ils ont été fondés au IIe siècle apr. J.-C. et ont connu plusieurs extensions avec de nouvelles salles et palestres, jusqu'à l'abandon de l'ensemble vers le VIIIe siècle, à l’époque omeyyade.

Maisons, palais
Le palais dit « de Trajan »
Cette vaste construction est en réalité une demeure d’époque byzantine (Ve – VIe siècle), comprenant deux corps de bâtiments et les vestiges d'un portique, disposés autour d'une cour carrée.

Le quartier d’habitations à l’est des thermes du Sud
Ce quartier, situé au sud de la rue principale est-ouest, entre la palestre est des thermes du Sud et le « nouveau prétoire », a été dégagé dans les années 1990 par la Direction générale des Antiquités de Syrie. Il est constitué de maisons séparées par des ruelles, dont la plus importante, orientée nord-sud, rejoignait la rue principale à l’est de l'église des thermes.
Le « nouveau prétoire » présente sa façade sur la rue principale. Son identification est rendue possible par une inscription byzantine qui fait mention de la construction d'un nouveau prétoire, probablement en cet endroit, en 490.
Le rez-de-chaussée d'une « maison omeyyade », avec des écuries, est conservé entre l'église des thermes du Sud et le « nouveau prétoire ».
Près de là se trouvent les vestiges d'une église byzantine dite « église des thermes du Sud » et ceux d'un temple d'origine nabatéenne, transformé dans les siècles suivants, puis recouvert lors de la construction de l'église  byzantine.

Le mausolée Saint-Georges (ou mausolée Saint-Élias)
Cette maison antique, probablement byzantine, située au nord-ouest de la mosquée al-Khidr, sur la rue nord-sud qui rejoint la place du tétrapyle, comporte une salle allongée couverte par quatre arcs transversaux. Elle abrite un tombeau de saint. D’après sa situation, le mausolée Saint-Georges pourrait, dans un premier état, avoir constitué le fond du portique de cette rue.

Les « belles maisons »
Ce groupe de maisons du IIe  ou  IIIe siècle présente la façade de rue la mieux conservée de Bosra, à l’angle nord-ouest du carrefour entre la rue nord-sud et la rue est-ouest. Le mur est conservé au rez-de-chaussée sur une longueur de 28 m à partir du coin de la rue. Six portes sont encore en place. Au-dessus de chaque porte se trouvait une fenêtre dont une est conservée.

Églises
La grande église à plan centré (ou cathédrale de l'Est)
Les fouilles entreprises à partir de 1985 ont montré que cette grande église byzantine recouvre des bâtiments antérieurs nabatéen et romain, avec des remplois massifs d'éléments appartenant à chacune de ces périodes. Dans le plan carré du bâtiment nabatéen est venu s'inscrire une église byzantine à abside et colonnade circulaire faite de grandes colonnes corinthiennes certainement issues d'un temple romain antérieur. L'ensemble atteignant une portée de 33 m, il faut imaginer une couverture à coupole centrale en bois, comme l'était celle du monastère Saint-Siméon-le-Stylite, dans le Nord de la Syrie.

L’église des Saints Serge, Bacchus et Léonce et le Palais « épiscopal » Saint-Serge
Une inscription, aujourd'hui disparue, indiquait la date de la consécration de l’église en 512 par Julianos, archevêque de Bosra, ce qui lui vaut le surnom de « Cathédrale ». L'église de plan carré, avec un espace central à colonnade en forme de tétraconque, était couverte d'une coupole, avec une vaste abside et une iconostase pour le clergé. Les éléments visibles sont des remplois d'éléments nabatéens et romains, avec de belles fresques dont certaines sont encore assez bien conservées.

Mosquées, madrasas
La mosquée de Fâtima
La mosquée, du XIIIe siècle ou XIVe siècle, est située près de l’église des Saints Serge, Bacchus et Léonce. Son plan est rectangulaire, de 11 × 21 m, formant une longue salle voûtée en plein ceintre. Elle comporte un minaret carré, détaché du bâtiment principal, daté de 1306.

L’école coranique (madrasa) de Abû al-Fidâ’
L’école coranique (madrasa) de Abû al-Fidâ’ (ou ad-Dabbagha « des tanneries »), située au bord du réservoir, a certainement alimenté en eau la citadelle et les bains construits à la même époque. L'inscription au milieu de la façade donne 1225 pour la construction, l'architecte étant un certain Mukannâ Ibn ‘Abbâd, avec al-Mu‘azzam ‘Îsâ, frère du gouverneur ayyoubide en titre as-Sâlih Ismâ‘îl, comme maître d’œuvre.

La mosquée de Yâqût
Les inscriptions, sur la façade ouest, la désignent comme la mosquée funéraire de Shihâb al-dîn Yûsuf, mort en 1257, fils du commandant de la citadelle Yâqût. Elle est divisée en deux salles.

La mosquée al-Khidr
Cette petite mosquée située entre le tétrapyle (24) et la source d’al-Jahîr (44) porte le nom d’al-Khidr, personnage légendaire populaire et vénéré comme un saint dans le monde islamique.
En 1955, l’édifice de la mosquée al-Khidr a été consolidé par le Service des Antiquités.

La mosquée d’Omar (Grande Mosquée, mosquée du Vendredi)
La mosquée d’Omar doit son nom au calife ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattâb (634-644), sous lequel la Syrie a été conquise par l’Islam. Selon deux inscriptions, la fondation de la mosquée et de son minaret remonte aux environs de 720-750, à l’époque omeyyade. La tour de la grande mosquée de Bosra a été longtemps considérée comme le minaret conservé le plus ancien du monde islamique. Cependant, les recherches montrent que les constructions existantes ont été réalisées aux XIIe et XIIIe siècles. Le plan carré à arcades est inspiré de la mosquée des Omeyyades de Damas. Entre 1967 et 1981, les parties hautes de la mosquée d’Omar et de la mosquée al-Mabrak ont été restaurées en vue de leur utilisation, en même temps que la madrasa Abû al-Fidâ’.

La mosquée Mubârak (ou Basmeen)
Construite au Xe siècle et restaurée au XIIIe siècle, la mosquée Mubârak est située à 50 m environ à l’ouest de la mosquée Musalla al-Mal‘ab. Elle a été construite sur le rempart Est. Elle est constituée d’une petite salle rectangulaire en largeur, dont la porte s’ouvre vers le nord et couverte par deux arcs transversaux qui supportent les dalles de couverture. La niche de prière est aménagée dans le mur sud, en remployant un couronnement de niche antique.

La mosquée Musalla al-Mal‘ab, ou mosquée « anonyme »
Le petit bâtiment, au sud-est du cimetière, présente une petite salle quadrangulaire, faite de remplois antiques. Le toit a été construit selon la technique hauranaise, avec une couverture de dalles de basalte.

La mosquée Jâmi‘ al-Mabrak an-Naqa (mosquée de l'Agenouillement de la Chamelle)
À l’angle nord-est de la Bosra antique et médiévale se trouve le complexe nommé « Jâmi‘ al-Mabrak », du XIIIe siècle, qui occupe une place particulière parmi les constructions islamiques de la ville, car il est relié par des légendes aux premiers temps de l’Islam.
D’après la tradition, le Prophète Muhammad, jeune homme, est venu prier là au moment de son séjour à Bosra. Le nom de « Mabrak an-Naqa », c’est-à-dire « le lieu de l'Agenouillement de la Chamelle », évoque le moment où le Prophète a mis pied à terre ; il est mis en relation avec la pierre placée devant la niche de prière (mihrab) de la partie sud-ouest du monument. Le bloc présente à sa face supérieure des traces en creux comme en laissent des chameaux agenouillés sur le sable. Suivant une autre tradition, c’est l’endroit où s’est reposé le chameau qui a transporté la première copie du Coran du Hijâz à Damas. Cependant, les auteurs arabes médiévaux ne mentionnent pas de chameau dans leur énumération des lieux de pèlerinages syriens. L’important pour eux était que Muhammad a séjourné à Bosra et que le moine Bahîra lui a annoncé son destin de Prophète. La position de la mosquée est en accord avec cette tradition : elle est la plus proche, en effet, de la « basilique de Bahîra ».
La coupole avait déjà disparu entièrement au début du XXe siècle. De graves dégâts dans la construction furent réparés dans les années 1960. Une restauration systématique effectuée en 1986-1989 avec l'Institut archéologique allemand a de nouveau rendu possible l'utilisation de l’édifice pour le culte.

Nécropoles, tombeaux
La nécropole de Tell Aswad
Il subsiste deux tombeaux monumentaux visibles à l'ouest de l'amphithéâtre. L'un présente un plan carré de 3 m de côté, l'autre est un monument circulaire à deux exèdres. Tous deux sont construits en basalte local.

Personnalités liées
Titus de Bostra, évêque de Bosra au IVe siècle.

Notes et références
Annexes
Bibliographie
Butler, H. C., Ancient Architecture in Syria. Bosra, PPUAES II A 4, Leyde, 1914.
Peters, F. E., The Nabataeans in the Hawran, JAOS, 1977, p. 263-277.
Jacqueline Dentzer-Feydy, Michèle Vallerin, Thibaud Fournet, Ryad Mukdad et Anas Mukdad (dir.), Bosra. Aux portes de l’Arabie, Presses de l’Ifpo, Institut français du Proche-Orient. Beyrouth-Damas, 2007, édition numérique 2014.
Bosra. Aux portes de l’Arabie, Damas, Ifpo, 2007, 365 p. (ISBN 978-2-35159-060-7, lire en ligne)

Liens externes

Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

 Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Rome antique   Portail du patrimoine mondial   Portail de la Syrie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 205
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Bosra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Bosra (also spelled Bostra, Busrana, Bozrah, Bozra), officially known Busra al-Sham, is an ancient town in Syria. Due to being a major archaeological site, it has been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

## Understand
As Syria is at war, Bosra has appeared on UNESCO's List of World Heritage in Danger since 2013. Portions of the Ancient City of Bosra were destroyed during combat on 22 December 2015. There is fear of further deterioration due to severe damage to the western courtyard adjacent to Bosra’s 2nd century Roman theatre and to parts of the Ayyubid citadel which surrounds it.

## See
Heritage sites across Bosra have been damaged by the civil war.
32.51766736.4816611 Roman Theatre at Bosra. From 2nd century      (updated Oct 2019)
32.55109336.4332852 Kharaba Bridge.      (updated Oct 2019)
32.54938936.4960283 Gemarrin Bridge.      (updated Oct 2019)
32.521136.4764 Bab al-Hawa. Western gate of the city, dates back to the 2nd century AD.  (updated Jul 2021)
32.5215736.482895 Al-Omari Mosque. One of the oldest surviving mosques.      (updated Oct 2019)
Fatima Mosque.  (updated Jul 2021)

## Go next
Damascus
Ancient ruins in Palmyra were once a major attraction, but much has been destroyed by Da'esh in 2015. The site is a minefield and not safe for travel.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
KRAK DES CHEVALIERS
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: fortress
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:29:21


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 4,850
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krak_des_Chevaliers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Krak des Chevaliers (French: [kʁak de ʃ(ə)valje]; Arabic: قلعة الحصن, romanized: Qalʿat al-Ḥiṣn, Arabic: [ˈqalʕat alˈħisˤn]; Old French: Crac des Chevaliers or Crac de l'Ospital, lit. 'karak [fortress] of the hospital'; from Classical Syriac: ܟܪܟܐ, romanized: karəḵā, lit. 'walled city') is a medieval castle in Syria and one of the most important preserved medieval castles in the world. The site was first inhabited in the 11th century by Kurdish troops garrisoned there by the Mirdasids. In 1142 it was given by Raymond II, Count of Tripoli, to the order of the Knights Hospitaller. It remained occupied by them until it was reconquered by the Muslims in 1271.
The Hospitallers began rebuilding the castle in the 1140s and were finished by 1170 when an earthquake damaged the castle. The order controlled castles along the border of the County of Tripoli, a state founded after the First Crusade. Krak des Chevaliers was among the most important and acted as a center of administration as well as a military base. After a second phase of building was undertaken in the 13th century, Krak des Chevaliers became a concentric castle. This phase created the outer wall and gave the castle its current appearance. The first half of the century has been described as Krak des Chevaliers' "golden age". At its peak, Krak des Chevaliers housed a garrison of around 2,000. Such a large garrison allowed the Hospitallers to exact tribute from a wide area. From the 1250s the fortunes of the Knights Hospitaller took a turn for the worse and in 1271 the Mamluk Sultanate captured Krak des Chevaliers after a siege lasting 36 days, supposedly by way of a forged letter purportedly from the Hospitallers' Grand Master that caused the knights to surrender.
Renewed interest in Crusader castles in the 19th century led to the investigation of Krak des Chevaliers, and architectural plans were drawn up. In the late 19th or early 20th century a settlement had been created within the castle, causing damage to its fabric. The 500 inhabitants were moved in 1933 and the castle was given over to the French Alawite State, which carried out a program of clearing and restoration. When Syria declared independence in 1946, it assumed control.
Today, the village of al-Husn exists around the castle and has a population of nearly 9,000. Krak des Chevaliers is approximately 40 kilometres (25 mi) west of the city of Homs, close to the border of Lebanon, and is administratively part of the Homs Governorate. Since 2006, the castles of Krak des Chevaliers and Qal'at Salah El-Din have been recognised by UNESCO as World Heritage Sites. It was partially damaged in the Syrian civil war from shelling and recaptured by the Syrian government forces in 2014. Since then, reconstruction and conservation work on the site had begun. Reports by UNESCO and the Syrian government on the state of the site are produced yearly.

Etymology
"Krak" is derived from karak, the Syriac word for a walled city or fortress. Before the arrival of the crusaders, the local Arab ruler had established a fortification on the site manned by Kurds, giving it the name, in Arabic, of Ḥoṣn al-Akrād (حصن الأكراد), or "fort of the Kurds". Following the construction of the present castle, the crusaders (whose elite spoke either Old French or, in Tripoli, possibly Old Occitan) corrupted that name into Le Crat and then, as a result of confusing it with karak, the name evolved into Le Crac.
Because of its association with the Knights Hospitallers, it was known as Crac de l'Ospital (Fortress of the Hospital) during the Middle Ages. The name was later romanticised to become Krak des Chevaliers in French in the 19th century, meaning "Fortress of the Knights".

Location
The castle sits atop a 650-metre-high (2,130 ft) hill east of Tartus, Syria, in the Homs Gap. On the other side of the gap, 27 kilometres (17 mi) away, was the 12th-century castle of Gibelacar (Hisn Ibn Akkar). The route through the strategically important Homs Gap connects the cities of Tripoli and Homs. To the north of the castle lies the Syrian Coastal Mountain Range, and to the south, Lebanon. The surrounding area is fertile, benefiting from streams and abundant rainfall. Compared to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, the other Crusader states had less land suitable for farming; however, the limestone peaks of Tripoli were well-suited to defensive sites.
Property in the County of Tripoli, granted to the Knights in the 1140s, included the Krak des Chevaliers, the towns of Rafanea and Montferrand, and the Beqa'a plain separating Homs and Tripoli. Homs was never under Crusader control, so the region around the Krak des Chevaliers was vulnerable to expeditions from the city. While its proximity caused the Knights problems with regard to defending their territory, it also meant Homs was close enough for them to raid. Because of the castle's command of the plain, it became the Knights' most important base in the area.

History
Origins and Crusader period
According to the 13th-century Arab historian Ibn Shaddad, in 1031, the Mirdasid emir of Aleppo and Homs, Shibl ad-Dawla Nasr, established a settlement of Kurdish tribesmen at the site of the castle, which was then known as "Ḥiṣn al-Safḥ". Nasr restored Hisn al-Safh to help reestablish the Mirdasids' access to the coast of Tripoli after they lost nearby Hisn Ibn Akkar to the Fatimids in 1029. Due to Nasr's garrisoning of Kurdish troops at the site, the castle became known as "Ḥiṣn al-Akrād" (Fortress of the Kurds). The castle was strategically located at the southern edge of the Jibal al-Alawiyin mountain range and dominated the road between Homs and Tripoli. When building castles, engineers often chose elevated sites, such as hills and mountains, that provided natural obstacles.
In January 1099, on the journey to Jerusalem during the First Crusade, the company of Raymond IV of Toulouse came under attack from the garrison of Hisn al-Akrad, the forerunner of the Krak, who harried Raymond's foragers. The following day, Raymond marched on the castle and found it deserted. The crusaders briefly occupied the castle in February of the same year but abandoned it when they continued their march towards Jerusalem. Permanent occupation began in 1110 when Tancred, Prince of Galilee took control of the site. The early castle was substantially different from the extant remains, and no trace of this first castle survives at the site.
The origins of the order of the Knights Hospitaller are unclear, but it probably emerged around the 1070s in Jerusalem. It started as a religious order that cared for the sick, and later looked after pilgrims to the Holy Land. After the success of the First Crusade in capturing Jerusalem in 1099, many Crusaders donated their new property in the Levant to the Hospital of St John. Early donations were in the newly formed Kingdom of Jerusalem, but over time the order extended its holdings to the Crusader states of the County of Tripoli and the Principality of Antioch. Evidence suggests that in the 1130s, the order became militarised when Fulk, King of Jerusalem, granted the newly built castle at Beth Gibelin to the order in 1136. A papal bull from between 1139 and 1143 may indicate the order hiring people to defend pilgrims. There were also other military orders, such as the Knights Templar, that offered protection to pilgrims.

Between 1142 and 1144 Raymond II, Count of Tripoli, granted property in the county to the order. According to historian Jonathan Riley-Smith, the Hospitallers effectively established a "palatinate" within Tripoli. The property included castles with which the Hospitallers were expected to defend Tripoli. Along with Krak des Chevaliers, the Hospitallers were given four other castles along the borders of the state, which allowed the order to dominate the area. The order's agreement with Raymond II stated that if he did not accompany knights of the order on campaign, the spoils belonged entirely to the order, and if he was present it was split equally between the count and the order. Further, Raymond II could not make peace with the Muslims without the permission of the Hospitallers. The Hospitallers made Krak des Chevaliers a center of administration for their new property, undertaking work at the castle that would make it one of the most elaborate Crusader fortifications in the Levant.
After acquiring the site in 1142, they began building a new castle to replace the former Kurdish fortification. This work lasted until 1170, when an earthquake damaged the castle. An Arab source mentions that the quake destroyed the castle's chapel, which was replaced by the present chapel. In 1163, the Crusaders emerged victorious over Nur ad-Din in the Battle of al-Buqaia near Krak des Chevaliers.
Drought conditions between 1175 and 1180 prompted the Crusaders to sign a two-year truce with the Muslims, but without Tripoli included in the terms. During the 1180s, raids by Christians and Muslims into each other's territory became more frequent. In 1180, Saladin ventured into the County of Tripoli, ravaging the area. Unwilling to meet him in open battle, the Crusaders retreated to the relative safety of their fortifications. Without capturing the castles, Saladin could not secure control of the area, and once he retreated the Hospitallers were able to revitalise their damaged lands. The Battle of Hattin in 1187 was a disastrous defeat for the Crusaders: Guy of Lusignan, King of Jerusalem, was captured, as was the True Cross, a relic discovered during the First Crusade. Afterwards, Saladin ordered the execution of the captured Templar and Hospitaller knights, such was the importance of the two orders in defending the Crusader states. After the battle, the Hospitaller castles of Belmont, Belvoir, and Bethgibelin fell to Muslim armies. Following these losses, the Order focused its attention on its castles in Tripoli. In May 1188, Saladin led an army to attack Krak des Chevaliers, but on seeing the castle, decided it was too well defended and instead marched on the Hospitaller castle of Margat, which he also failed to capture.
Another earthquake struck in 1202, and it may have been after this event that the castle was remodelled. The 13th-century work was the last period of building at Krak des Chevaliers and gave it its current appearance. An enclosing stone circuit was built between 1142 and 1170; the earlier structure became the castle's inner court or ward. If there was a circuit of walls surrounding the inner court that pre-dated the current outer walls, no trace of it has been discovered.

The first half of the 13th century has been characterised as Krak des Chevaliers' "golden age". While other Crusader strongholds came under threat, Krak des Chevaliers and its garrison of 2,000 soldiers dominated the surrounding area. It was effectively the center of a principality which remained in Crusader hands until 1271, and was the only major inland area to remain constantly under Crusader control during this period. Crusaders who passed through the area would often stop at the castle, and probably made donations. King Andrew II of Hungary visited in 1218 and proclaimed the castle the "key of the Christian lands". He was so impressed with the castle that he gave a yearly income of 60 marks to the Master and 40 to the brothers. Geoffroy de Joinville, uncle of the noted chronicler of the Crusades Jean de Joinville, died at Krak des Chevaliers in 1203 or 1204 and was buried in the castle's chapel.
The main contemporary accounts relating to Krak des Chevaliers are of Muslim origin and tend to emphasise Muslim success while overlooking setbacks against the Crusaders, although they suggest that the Knights Hospitaller forced the settlements of Hama and Homs to pay tribute to the Order. This situation lasted as long as Saladin's successors warred between themselves. The proximity of Krak des Chevaliers to Muslim territories allowed it to take on an offensive role, acting as a base from which neighboring areas could be attacked. By 1203, the garrison was making raids on Montferrand (which was under Muslim control) and Hama, and in 1207 and 1208 the castle's soldiers took part in an attack on Homs. Krak des Chevaliers acted as a base for expeditions to Hama in 1230 and 1233 after the amir refused to pay tribute. The former was unsuccessful, but the 1233 expedition was a show of force that demonstrated the importance of Krak des Chevaliers.

In the 1250s, the fortunes of the Hospitallers at Krak des Chevaliers took a turn for the worse. A Muslim army estimated to number 10,000 men ravaged the countryside around the castle in 1252, after which the Order's finances declined sharply. In 1268, Master Hugues Revel complained that the area, previously home to around 10,000 people, now stood deserted and that the Order's property in the Kingdom of Jerusalem produced little income. He also noted that by this point there were only 300 of the Order's brethren left in the east. On the Muslim side, in 1260 Baibars became Sultan of Egypt, following his overthrow of the incumbent ruler Qutuz, and went on to unite Egypt and Syria. As a result, Muslim settlements that had previously paid tribute to the Hospitallers at Krak des Chevaliers no longer felt intimidated into doing so.
As for Hugues Revel, some of the castellans of this castle are identified: Pierre de Mirmande (Grand Commander) and Geoffroy le Rat (Grand Master).
Baibars ventured into the area around Krak des Chevaliers in 1270 and allowed his men to graze their animals on the fields around the castle. When he received news that year of the Eighth Crusade led by King Louis IX of France, Baibars left for Cairo to avoid a confrontation. After Louis died in 1271, Baibars returned to deal with Krak des Chevaliers. Before he marched on the castle, the Sultan captured the smaller castles in the area, including Chastel Blanc. On 3 March, Baibars' army arrived at Krak des Chevaliers. By the time the Sultan appeared on the scene, the castle may already have been blockaded by Mamluk forces for several days. Of the three Arabic accounts of the siege, only one was contemporary, that of Ibn Shaddad, who was not present at the siege. Peasants who lived in the area had fled to the castle for safety and were kept in the outer ward. As soon as Baibars arrived, he erected mangonels, powerful siege weapons which he would later turn on the castle. In a probable reference to a walled suburb outside the castle's entrance, Ibn Shaddad records that two days later the first line of defences fell to the besiegers.
Rain interrupted the siege, but on 21 March, immediately south of Krak des Chevaliers, Baibar's forces captured a triangular outwork possibly defended by a timber palisade. On 29 March, the attackers undermined a tower in the southwest corner, causing it to collapse whereupon Baibars' army attacked through the breach. In the outer ward, they encountered the peasants who had sought refuge in the castle. Though the outer ward had fallen, with a handful of the garrison killed in the process, the Crusaders retreated to the more formidable inner ward. After a lull of ten days, the besiegers conveyed a letter to the garrison, supposedly from the Grand Master of the Knights Hospitaller in Tripoli, which granted permission, (aman), for them to surrender on 8 April 1271. Although the letter was a forgery, the garrison capitulated and the Sultan spared their lives. The new owners of the castle undertook repairs, focused mainly on the outer ward. The Hospitaller chapel was converted to a mosque and two mihrabs (prayer niches) were added to the interior.

Later history
During the Ottoman period (1516–1918), the castle housed a company of local janissaries and was the centre of the nahiye (tax district) of Hisn al-Akrad, attached first to the Tripoli Sanjak and later Homs, both part of the Tripoli Eyalet. The castle itself was commanded by a dizdar (castle warden). Several Turkmen and Kurdish tribes were settled in the area, and in the 18th century the district was mainly controlled by local notables from the Dandashi family. In 1894, the Ottoman government considered stationing a company of auxiliary soldiers there, but revised its plans after deciding the castle was too old and access too difficult. As a result, the capital of the district was then moved to nearby Talkalakh.
After the Franks were driven from the Holy Land in 1291, European familiarity with the castles of the Crusades declined. It was not until the 19th century that interest in these buildings was renewed, so there are no detailed plans from before 1837. Emmanuel Guillaume-Rey was the first European researcher to scientifically study Crusader castles in the Holy Land. In 1871, he published the work Etudes sur les monuments de l'architecture militaire des Croisés en Syrie et dans l'ile de Chypre; which included plans and drawings of the major Crusader castles in Syria, including Krak des Chevaliers. In some instances his drawings were inaccurate, however for Krak des Chavaliers they record features which have since been lost.
Paul Deschamps visited the castle in February 1927. Since Rey had visited in the 19th century, a village of 500 people had been established within the castle. Renewed inhabitation had damaged the site: underground vaults had been used as rubbish tips and in some places the battlements had been destroyed. Deschamps and fellow architect François Anus attempted to clear some of the detritus; General Maurice Gamelin assigned 60 Alawite soldiers to help. Deschamps left in March 1927, and work resumed when he returned two years later. The culmination of Deschamp's work at the castle was the publication of Les Châteaux des Croisés en Terre Sainte I: le Crac des Chevaliers in 1934, with detailed plans by Anus. The survey has been widely praised, described as "brilliant and exhaustive" by military historian D. J. Cathcart King in 1949 and "perhaps the finest account of the archaeology and history of a single medieval castle ever written" by historian Hugh Kennedy in 1994.
As early as 1929, there were suggestions that the castle should be taken under French control. On 16 November 1933, Krak des Chevaliers was given into the control of the French state, and cared for by the Académie des Beaux-Arts. The villagers were moved and paid F1 million between them in compensation. Over the following two years, a programme of cleaning and restoration was carried out by a force of 120 workers. Once finished, Krak des Chevaliers was one of the key tourist attractions in the French Levant. Pierre Coupel, who had undertaken similar work at the Tower of the Lions and the two castles at Sidon, supervised the work. Despite the restoration, no archaeological excavations were carried out. The Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon, which had been established in 1920, ended in 1946 with the declaration of Syrian independence. The castle was made a World Heritage Site by UNESCO, along with Qal'at Salah El-Din, in 2006, and is owned by the Syrian government.

Several of the castle's former residents built their houses outside the fortress and a village called al-Husn has since developed. Many of the al-Husn's roughly 9,000 Muslims residents benefit economically from the tourism generated by the site.
The Syrian Civil War began in 2011, prompting UNESCO to raise concerns that the war might damage cultural sites including Krak des Chevaliers. The castle was shelled in August 2012 by the Syrian Arab Army, damaging the Crusader chapel. It was damaged again in July 2013 by an airstrike conducted by the Syrian Arab Air Force during the Siege of Homs, and once more on 18 August 2013. The Syrian Arab Army captured the castle and village after the Battle of Hosn in March 2014. Since then, UNESCO has published periodic reports about the state of the site, reconstruction and conservation measures.

Architecture
Writing in the early 20th century, T. E. Lawrence, popularly known as Lawrence of Arabia, remarked that Krak des Chevaliers was "perhaps the best preserved and most wholly admirable castle in the world, [a castle which] forms a fitting commentary on any account of the Crusading buildings of Syria". Castles in Europe provided lordly accommodation for their owners and were centers of administration; in the Levant the need for defence was paramount and was reflected in castle design. Kennedy suggests that "The castle scientifically designed as a fighting machine surely reached its apogee in great buildings like Margat and Crac des Chevaliers."

Krak des Chevaliers can be classified both as a spur castle, due to its site, and after the 13th-century expansion a fully developed concentric castle. It was similar in size and layout to Vadum Jacob, a Crusader castle built in the late 1170s. Margat has also been cited as Krak des Chevaliers' sister castle. The main building material at Krak des Chevaliers was limestone; the ashlar facing is so fine that the mortar is barely noticeable. Outside the castle's entrance was a "walled suburb" known as a burgus, no trace of which remains. To the south of the outer ward was a triangular outwork and the Crusaders may have intended to build stone walls and towers around it. It is unknown how it was defended at the time of the 1271 siege, though it has been suggested it was surrounded by a timber palisade. South of the castle, the spur on which it stands is connected to the next hill, so that siege engines can approach on level ground. The inner defences are strongest at this point, with a cluster of towers connected by a thick wall.

Inner ward
Between 1142 and 1170, the Knights Hospitaller undertook a building programme on the site. The castle was defended by a stone curtain wall studded with square towers which projected slightly. The main entrance was between two towers on the eastern side, and there was a postern gate in the northwest tower. At the center was a courtyard surrounded by vaulted chambers. The lay of the land dictated the castle's irregular shape. A site with natural defences was a typical location for Crusader castles and steep slopes provided Krak des Chevaliers with defences on all sides bar one, where the castle's defences were concentrated. This phase of building was incorporated into the later castle's construction.

When Krak des Chevaliers was remodelled in the 13th century, new walls surrounding the inner court were built. They followed the earlier walls, with a narrow gap between them in the west and south, which was turned into a gallery from which defenders could unleash missiles. In this area, the walls were supported by a steeply sloping glacis which provided additional protection against both siege weapons and earthquakes. Four large, round towers project vertically from the glacis; they were used as accommodation for the Knights of the garrison, about 60 at its peak. The southwest tower was designed to house the rooms of the Grand Master of the Knights Hospitaller. Though the defences which once crested the walls of the inner wards no longer survive in most places, it seems that they did not extend for the entire circuit. Machicolations were absent from the southern face. The area between the inner court and the outer walls was narrow and not used for accommodation. In the east, where the defences were weakest, there was an open cistern filled by an aqueduct. It acted both as a moat and water supply for the castle.
At the north end of the small courtyard is a chapel and at the southern end is an esplanade. The esplanade is raised above the rest of the courtyard; the vaulted area beneath it would have provided storage and could have acted as stabling and shelter from missiles. Lining the west of the courtyard is the hall of the Knights. Though probably first built in the 12th century, the interior dates from the 13th-century remodelling. The tracery and delicate decoration is a sophisticated example of Gothic architecture, probably dating from the 1230s.

Chapel
The current chapel was probably built to replace the one destroyed by an earthquake in 1170. Only the east end of the original chapel, which housed the apse, and a small part of the south wall survive from the original chapel. The later chapel had a barrel vault and an uncomplicated apse; its design would have been considered outmoded by contemporary standards in France, but bears similarities to that built around 1186 at Margat. It was divided into three roughly equal bays. A cornice runs round the chapel at the point where the vault ends and the wall begins. Oriented roughly east to west, it was 21.5 metres (71 ft) long and 8.5 metres (28 ft) wide with the main entrance from the west and a second smaller one in the north wall. When the castle was remodelled in the early 13th century, the entrance was moved to the south wall. The chapel was lit by windows above the cornice, one at the west end, one on either side of the east bay, and one on the south side of the central bay, and the apse at the east end had a large window. In 1935, a second chapel was discovered outside the castle's main entrance, however it no longer survives.

Outer ward
The second phase of building work undertaken by the Hospitallers began in the early 13th century and lasted decades. The outer walls were built in the last major construction on the site, lending the Krak des Chevaliers its current appearance. Standing 9 metres (30 ft) high, the outer circuit had towers that projected strongly from the wall. While the towers of the inner court had a square plan and did not project far beyond the wall, the towers of the 13th-century outer walls were rounded. This design was new and even contemporary Templar castles did not have rounded towers. The technique was developed at Château Gaillard in France by Richard the Lionheart between 1196 and 1198. The extension to the southeast is of lesser quality than the rest of the circuit and was built at an unknown date. Probably around the 1250s, a postern was added to the north wall.
Arrow slits in the walls and towers were distributed to minimise the amount of dead ground around the castle. Machicolations crowned the walls, offering defenders a way to hurl projectiles towards enemies at the foot of the wall. They were so cramped, archers would have had to crouch inside them. The box machicolations were unusual: those at Krak des Chevaliers were more complex that those at Saône or Margat, and there were no comparable features amongst Crusader castles. However, they bore similarities to Muslim work, such as the contemporary defences at the Citadel of Aleppo. It is unclear which side imitated the other, as the date they were added to Krak des Chevaliers is unknown, but it does provide evidence for the diffusion of military ideas between the Muslim and Christian armies. These defences were accessed by a wall-walk known as a chemin de ronde. In the opinion of historian Hugh Kennedy, the defences of the outer wall were "the most elaborate and developed anywhere in the Latin east ... the whole structure is a brilliantly designed and superbly built fighting machine".
When the outer walls were built in the 13th century the main entrance was enhanced. A vaulted corridor led uphill from the outer gate in the northeast. The corridor made a hairpin turn halfway along its length, making it an example of a bent entrance. Bent entrances were a Byzantine innovation, but that at Krak des Chevaliers was a particularly complex example. It extended for 137 metres (450 ft), and along its length were murder-holes which allowed defenders to shower attackers with missiles. Anyone going straight ahead rather than following the hairpin turn would emerge in the area between the castle's two circuits of walls. To access the inner ward, the passage had to be followed round.

Frescoes
Despite its predominantly military character, the castle is one of the few sites where Crusader art (in the form of frescoes) has been preserved. In 1935, 1955, and 1978, medieval frescoes were discovered within Krak des Chevaliers after later plaster and white-wash had decayed. The frescos were painted on the interior and exterior of the main chapel and the chapel outside the main entrance, which no longer survives. Writing in 1982, historian Jaroslav Folda noted that at the time there had been little investigation of Crusader frescoes that would provide a comparison for the fragmentary remains found at Krak des Chevaliers. Those in the chapel were painted on the masonry from the 1170–1202 rebuild. Mold, smoke, and moisture have made it difficult to preserve the frescoes. The fragmentary nature of the red and blue frescoes inside the chapel makes them difficult to assess. The one on the exterior of the chapel depicted the Presentation of Jesus at the Temple.

See also
List of castles in Syria
List of Crusader castles
List of World Heritage in Danger

References
Works cited
Further reading
External links

Krak des Chevaliers photos and information
UNESCO Crac des Chevaliers


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 3,783
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krak_des_Chevaliers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Le krak des Chevaliers (en arabe : قلعة الحصن Qal`at al-Hosn, « La forteresse imprenable » ou littéralement « Le château de la forteresse » ), krak de l'Hospital (voir krak) est un château fort, emblématique de la Renaissance du XIIe siècle. Datant de l'époque des croisades, il est situé dans l'ouest de la Syrie, sur les derniers contreforts du jabal Ansariya. Depuis 2006, il est inscrit sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'UNESCO.
Les Hospitaliers de l'ordre de Saint-Jean de Jérusalem gèrent le fort de 1142 à 1271, date de sa conquête par Baybars, sultan des Mamelouks. Cette conquête met fin à 129 ans d'invincibilité du fort.
Thomas Edward Lawrence, en le découvrant en 1909, le jour de son 21e anniversaire, le qualifie de « plus beau des châteaux du monde, certainement le plus pittoresque que j’ai vu, une véritable merveille. »

Situation géographique et chronologie
Dominant d'environ cinq-cents mètres la plaine d'El-Bukeia, situé à proximité du Liban (huit kilomètres), le krak des Chevaliers fait partie d'un réseau défensif qui parcourt les frontières des anciens États latins d'Orient et contrôle la trouée d'Homs, point stratégique au carrefour des routes reliant Homs, à l'est, à la ville côtière de Tortose, à l'ouest, et Antioche, au nord, à Tripoli puis Beyrouth, au sud. C'est l'un des châteaux croisés les plus prestigieux et les mieux conservés.

Antiquité
Le Moyen-Orient fut toujours un point de rencontre des civilisations. S'y croisèrent Babyloniens, Égyptiens, Hittites, Hébreux, Romains, Perses, Byzantins, Arabes, Kurdes, Turcs seldjoukides puis ottomans, autant de cultures militaires différentes qui créèrent là une nouvelle architecture dont la quintessence reste de nos jours incarnée par le krak des Chevaliers.
La bataille de Qadesh opposant Ramsès II aux Hittites aux environs de 1274 avant notre ère a probablement eu lieu sur le Tell Nébi Mend à cinquante kilomètres au sud-est du krak ; elle est relatée sur les bas-reliefs du temple de Louxor. On y voit une forteresse hérissée de hautes tours et de créneaux. Qadesh va ensuite décliner au profit de la cité antique d'Émèse, mieux située. Les Romains dans un premier temps, puis les Byzantins après le Grand Schisme d'Orient dresseront dans la région de l'actuelle Syrie de nombreuses forteresses de tradition hellénique pour résister à la pression persane qui seront autant de modèles pour les fortifications construites par les armées arabo-musulmanes après qu'elles eurent conquis cette région de 634 à 639.

Conquête arabo-musulmane
D'abord sous la domination omeyyade, la construction reprend de plus belle, mais des fortifications byzantines sont aussi remaniées et transformées en véritables palais, les bâtisseurs profitant de la présence d'antiques infrastructures (barrage sur l'Oronte et son aqueduc) pour faire fleurir des jardins au milieu du désert. Ces constructions continuèrent après la prise du pouvoir par les Abbassides en 750, et déclinèrent au fur et à mesure que l'armée, composée essentiellement de Turcs d'une tradition militaire moins basée sur les fortifications, s'emparait du pouvoir. De 945 à 1055, des Iraniens établiront même la dynastie des Bouyides.
Durant la même période, arrivent deux évènements majeurs engageant l'avenir de la région. D'abord, en 909, les fatimides chiites s'opposent au pouvoir abbasside de Bagdad et fondent une dynastie qui règnera sur tout le Maghreb et s'étendra au début du XIe siècle jusqu'en Palestine. Al Hakim lance alors une répression contre les chrétiens d'Orient et les pèlerins chrétiens, traditionnellement bien tolérés. Il détruit les édifices chrétiens de Jérusalem. Cette fermeture soudaine des lieux et routes de pèlerinage sera l'un des événements qui conduisirent au déclenchement des croisades. En second lieu, les Seldjoukides, turcophones islamisés (sunnites) originaires de steppes à l'est de la mer d'Aral se lancent à la conquête du Moyen-Orient. Ils s'emparent de Bagdad en 1055, et prennent l'est de l'Anatolie aux Byzantins lors de la bataille de Manzikert en 1071, et leur sultanat s'étend alors sur l'Iran, l'est de l'Anatolie, la Syrie et la Palestine jusqu'aux frontières de l'Égypte fatimide. Le krak est alors reconstruit sur le site d'une petite forteresse, sans doute occupée depuis l'antiquité, en 1031 par les Abbassides qui y installent une garnison kurde pour résister à la pression seldjoukide. La forteresse devint connue sous le nom de Hisn al-Akrād la « forteresse des Kurdes ».

La première croisade
En janvier 1099, à l'arrivée de la première croisade, la garnison kurde fut évincée par Raymond de Saint-Gilles qui abandonna les lieux presque immédiatement, son objectif étant Jérusalem. Il tenta en vain de reprendre la forteresse en avril 1102 et c'est finalement Tancrède, le régent d'Antioche, qui s'en empara en 1110 et y installa une garnison franque sous l'autorité du comte de Tripoli. En 1115, une offensive d'Arslan, l'émir d'Alep, fut repoussée.
Au fil des années, l'importance du krak des Chevaliers crut parallèlement à l'influence des croisés vers l'est mais le coût de sa maintenance conduisit Raymond II à le confier à la garde des Hospitaliers (1142). C'est de cette époque que date le nom « krak des Chevaliers ». La forteresse pouvait accueillir une garnison de 2 000 hommes. 
Sous l'impulsion des Hospitaliers, plusieurs autres ouvrages défensifs furent construits dans les environs et le krak des Chevaliers fut dès lors relié par signaux de feu et par pigeons voyageurs aux fortifications de Gibelacar et Chastel Rouge (Hospitaliers) et de Chastel Blanc et Arima (Templiers).

La deuxième croisade
À partir du milieu du XIIe siècle, à la suite de la chute des Seldjoukides, aux victoires de Zengi sur les croisés (perte d'Édesse), à l'échec du siège de Damas par la deuxième croisade, et à l'arrivée au pouvoir de Nur ad-Din, un front musulman uni se dessine et la pression sur les croisés — et donc sur le krak des Chevaliers — se fait plus forte.
En 1157, un important tremblement de terre ébranle le château et Raymond du Puy, le grand maître des Hospitaliers, le fait restaurer et agrandir grâce à un financement du roi de Bohême. Ce fut la première d'une série de quatre phases de travaux qui s'échelonnèrent sur un siècle et demi (1144-1170, 1170-1202, 1250-1271 et 1271-1285).
En 1163, Nur ad-Din tente de s'emparer du krak mais son armée est mise en déroute au pied même de la forteresse par une attaque surprise de la cavalerie franque qui poursuit et décime les fuyards. Un second siège échoue aussi en 1167.
Un second tremblement de terre (1170) ayant causé des dégâts considérables, le krak des Chevaliers est reconstruit et consolidé en incluant de nombreux éléments d'architecture militaire empruntés aux Byzantins.
Saladin eut beau infliger de nombreuses défaites aux croisés, il ne peut s'emparer du krak des Chevaliers. À sa mort, en 1193, l'unité des musulmans se fragmente et le danger se fait moindre pour la forteresse qui entre alors dans son âge d'or, couvrant une surface totale de 2,5 hectares protégée par deux enceintes concentriques entièrement indépendantes. Le krak héberge une garnison de 2 000 hommes et posséde des vivres pour cinq ans.

La chute du krak
Au début du XIIIe siècle, plusieurs attaques sont repoussées (1207, 1218) et, en 1223, la forteresse sert de point de rassemblement à une armée franque réunie pour attaquer Hama. D'autres attaques ont encore lieu, toutes aussi stériles que les précédentes.
Vers la seconde moitié du XIIIe siècle, cependant, l'essoufflement du mouvement croisé avait réduit la garnison à moins de trois-cents hommes, la citadelle étant tenue par l'ordre militaire des Hospitaliers et, avec l'arrivée au pouvoir de Baybars, sultan des Mamelouks, les territoires sur lesquels le krak levait traditionnellement tribut étaient passés en mains ennemies. Ce n'était désormais plus qu'une question de temps avant que Baybars lui-même ne vienne attaquer la forteresse, ce qu'il fit en 1271. La première enceinte céda, la création de brèches dans certaines tours ainsi que la chute de la première enceinte, les défenseurs se replièrent dans le haut château, mais le sultan ne put malgré tout s'emparer du krak que par la ruse : il envoya une fausse missive, émanant prétendument du grand maître des Templiers, enjoignant aux assiégés de se rendre. Ceux-ci négocièrent leur vie contre la promesse de retourner dans leur pays d'origine et, le 8 avril, la citadelle changea de mains

Liste des dignitaires Hospitaliers
Liste des dignitaires Hospitaliers :

Châtelains
Jean de Anio. Août 1180.
Hermann. 1184 - avril 1185.
Pierre de Vallis. 1er février 1186.
Pierre de Mirmande. Janvier 1193 - 6 septembre 1199.
Geoffroy le Rat. Décembre 1204.
Raymond de Pignans. [12-18 janvier] 1218.
Arnaud de Monbrun. 18 novembre 1241.
Hugues Revel. 31 mai 1243.
Jean de Bubie. 7 août 1248.
Aymar de La Roche. 1er mars 1254 - 22 septembre 1254.
Nicolas Lorgne. 1255 – Après le 28 octobre 1266 (date à partir de laquelle il est possible qu'il soit devenu maréchal) et avant le 30 septembre 1268.
nom inconnu. 30 septembre 1268 - après 11 mai 1275 et avant 3 août 1277.

Commandeurs
nom inconnu. 15 juin 1270.
Bernard de Porte Clare. Après 11 mai 1275 - avant 3 août 1277.

Prieurs
Arnaud d'Arène. 30 août 1247.
nom inconnu. 30 septembre 1263 - 26 octobre 1267.

Après les croisades
Les Mamelouks utilisèrent et modifièrent le krak des Chevaliers en renforçant notamment le flanc sud et en ajoutant un hammam et un aqueduc, mais son intérêt stratégique diminua parallèlement à la menace franque. Les invasions timourides de Tamerlan (1400-1401) et celles des Ottomans en 1516 ignorèrent même le site. Par la suite, le fort fut connu sous le nom de Qalaʿat al-Hosn.
Le château servit ensuite de résidence à un gouverneur et, en 1859, l'expédition de Emmanuel Guillaume-Rey le trouva en excellent état. En 1920, le krak passa sous contrôle du mandat français et, afin de permettre la restauration du site, un village qui s'était installé dans ses murs fut reconstruit sur un emplacement qu'il occupe encore aujourd'hui. Les faibles finances des conservateurs des Beaux-Arts ne permettant qu'une seule restauration — il avait fallu racheter les murs aux villageois — celle-ci dut se faire au détriment d'autres sites tout aussi remarquables mais moins connus. Les forteresses de Margat et de Saladin (également appelé « château de Saône ») firent les frais de ce choix.
Le krak passa finalement sous le contrôle de la Syrie lors de l'adhésion de cette dernière à l'ONU et est aujourd'hui un site touristique. Cependant, contrairement aux châteaux forts islamiques, la Syrie ne l'a guère entretenu depuis cinquante ans et il se trouve chaque année dans un état de dégradation plus avancé.
Lors de la Guerre civile syrienne, il semble que le krak serve de retranchement aux opposants au régime et qu'il ait subi des bombardements durant l'été 2012.
Le 13 juillet 2013, la citadelle du krak des Chevaliers est touchée par des bombardements de l'armée de Bachar el-Assad. Plusieurs vidéos, diffusées via les réseaux sociaux depuis le 13 juillet, montrent qu'il y a au moins une frappe qui a touché la citadelle, provoquée par le raid aérien lancé par un MiG selon le militant qui filme la scène. Le 20 mars 2014, le château, jusque-là tenu par la rébellion est repris par les forces gouvernementales.

Architecture
Ce majestueux krak des Chevaliers est devenu en un siècle de construction l'un des exemples d'architecture militaire défensive les plus aboutis de son époque et même du Moyen Âge.
Une utilisation intelligente de la topographie et d'éléments d'architecture empruntés aux cultures européenne, byzantine et arabe ont rendu cette place imprenable pour peu qu'elle soit défendue par une garnison suffisante (Baybars utilisa la ruse plutôt que la force car il savait cette stratégie vouée à l'échec alors que le krak n'était plus défendu que par trois-cents hommes).
La protection de son système d'entrée était révolutionnaire : un long corridor, débouchant dans la salle d'armes de l'enceinte extérieure, entrecoupé de « sas », avec une voûte percée de nombreux assommoirs - pour accabler les assaillants sous les projectiles (pierres, sable fondu…).
Ce corridor est équipé (en entrée et sortie) de lourdes portes en bois (avec un système de poulies), permettant de bloquer les attaquants qui auraient réussi à survivre assez longtemps pour parvenir jusque-là…

Terrain
La forteresse, dominant les alentours, est construite sur une colline de 750 mètres de haut aux flancs abrupts, ce qui rend la poliorcétique de l'époque inefficace.
En outre, de gros travaux de terrassement ont encore renforcé cet avantage naturel dont des grands talus de vingt-deux mètres à la base des courtines afin d'empêcher la sape.

Construction
XIIe siècle
À la suite des tremblements de terre de 1157 et 1170, le krak est quasiment détruit et entièrement reconstruit. On ne sait rien ou presque de son plan avant ces destructions. Les travaux engagés à partir de 1170 forment le noyau central de la forteresse actuelle. C'est en fait une grande galerie triangulaire de 270 m de long et de près de neuf mètres de large où vivaient les frères hospitaliers. Conçue comme une caserne fortifiée, cette galerie est voûtée en croisée d'ogive et est d'abord flanquée de cinq tours carrées. Une chapelle fut construite dès 1170 dans la tour nord-est, puis remplacée au même endroit par une chapelle plus grande dès 1180. Cette chapelle a une voûte en berceau et présente sur les côtés une série d'arcatures aveugles à l'image de l'architecture religieuse de l'Europe méditerranéenne à la même époque (Languedoc et Provence) et est caractéristique des chapelles édifiées en Terre Sainte par les croisés.
Toute la cour centrale de l'édifice repose sur un vaste grenier voûté qui pouvait contenir, d'après des auteurs contemporains, jusqu'à cinq ans de vivres et de fourrage. L'eau de boisson nécessaire à tenir un tel siège était drainée depuis les terrasses au sommet des tours et stockée dans des réservoirs.
Une sixième tour, « la tour des latrines », sera construite au nord-ouest de la forteresse vers 1190. Elle abrite douze latrines et communique avec le dortoir des frères et permet de garder des conditions sanitaires satisfaisantes même en cas de siège prolongé. En outre, elle commande une poterne dissimulée sur sa face nord-est qui permet aux assiégés de tenter des sorties pour prendre l'ennemi à revers par surprise.
La construction d'un second mur d'enceinte débute au nord dans les dernières années du siècle.

XIIIe siècle
En 1202, après un nouveau tremblement de terre, d'autres travaux sont engagés qui renforcent considérablement le krak autant contre les attaques que contre les séismes. Ainsi, un « glacis » est construit sur les flancs sud et ouest de la forteresse. Il s'agit d'un appareillage de pierres de taille en pente forte qui s'appuie sur la muraille et l'« encoquille ». Ce glacis remplit deux fonctions distinctes : d'abord, il renforce le mur intérieur contre les séismes qui ont déjà ravagé plusieurs fois le krak ; ensuite, il abrite une galerie percée d'archères, ce qui augmente encore la puissance de feu de la place forte.
Dans le même temps, le flanc sud est considérablement modifié. Les tours carrées sont remplacées par deux tours rondes et une troisième en fer à cheval est construite au milieu de la muraille. Elle constitue un renfort défensif sur le flanc sud particulièrement exposé aux attaques. Un niveau est ajouté à la galerie primitive. La tour au milieu du flanc ouest est aussi modifiée et s'arrondit.
La cour intérieure est également remaniée et un bâtiment s'adosse maintenant au flanc est.
En 1250, saint Louis s'installe en Orient et prend la tête des Francs. Il amène avec lui des architectes qui aideront les croisés à défendre leurs places fortes. Un nouveau rempart est alors construit, probablement sur les conseils de ces architectes. Ce rempart mesure neuf mètres de haut, est placé à une distance de dix-sept à vingt-cinq mètres de la forteresse centrale et est défendu par douze tours rondes à la manière des standards de l'architecture militaire européenne de l'époque, ce qui rend les projectiles moins efficaces, ces tours ne présentant pas d'angles saillants plus fragiles. Le second mur est placé en contrebas du noyau central, ce qui permet aux défenseurs de tirer sur les attaquants depuis les deux positions.
Ce mur possède une seule porte à l'est qui débouche à l'intérieur sur une rampe étroite menant après des virages serrés à l'entrée de la muraille intérieure. Cette rampe rend la progression des assaillants difficile, et empêche l'utilisation d'un bélier contre la porte des fortifications centrales.
Un cloître est aussi bâti probablement à la même époque. S'adossant au bâtiment de la cour centrale, il prend pour modèle les cloîtres d'Île-de-France, ce qui semble indiquer qu'il fut construit en l'honneur de Saint Louis, ou tout du moins par ses architectes.
Des écuries sont également construites contre le flanc sud de la muraille extérieure.

XXIe siècle
En 2012, les insurgés syriens s'emparent du krak ; l’armée syrienne parvient à reconquérir la place forte. L'intérieur du château a souffert et porte la marque des combats qui ont précédé cette reconquête, malgré l'attention de l'armée syrienne à limiter les dommages à l'extérieur de l'édifice.
En 2013, alors que les combats font rage en Syrie, le krak des Chevaliers est inscrit par l’Unesco sur sa liste du patrimoine mondial en péril. Les combats entraînent des dommages, notamment dans l’église et la grande salle, célèbre pour ses colonnettes et ses voûtes inspirées par l’architecture gothique. 
À la suite de sa reprise définitive par l'armée syrienne en 2014, un important programme de restauration est lancé par le gouvernement syrien. En 2016, la citadelle bénéficie de l’aide d’archéologues hongrois pour restaurer le clocher de l’église. En 2018, celle-ci rouvre ses portes fermées depuis 2012. En novembre 2020, plus de quatre-cents étudiants d'une université locale participent à un chantier de restauration et de défrichage du site du château afin de le protéger des feux de forêt qui ont ravagé le centre et le nord-ouest de la Syrie l'été précédent.

Rôle stratégique
Le krak jouera un rôle essentiel dans la stratégie défensive des Francs en terre sainte. Le roi de Hongrie André II le définit comme étant « la clef des terres chrétiennes », tandis que le chroniqueur Ibn al-Athîr l'appelait « l'os en travers de la gorge des musulmans ». Cette importance stratégique est due à deux facteurs principaux : sa position géographique et son imprenabilité supposée et avérée, tant il est vrai qu'il ne fut jamais repris par la force après avoir été réduit par les croisés en 1109 puis rendu quasiment invulnérable par les travaux ultérieurs.

Défense des États latins
Le krak est un nœud principal dans le maillage de forteresses qui assurent la défense et la domination des territoires francs. Du haut de ses tours, on aperçoit les places fortes de Chastel Blanc à l'est et de la forteresse de Gibelacar au sud. Des feux d'alarme pouvaient être allumés et prévenir de proche en proche en cas d'attaque toutes les forteresses du comté de Tripoli.
Un autre avantage de la position géographique du krak est paradoxalement qu'il n'est pas situé sur une route principale, ce qui rend plus difficile une attaque de grande envergure. Fort de sa victoire à Hattin, et disposant d'une armée de près de 40 000 hommes, Saladin, lors de sa remontée vers le nord, décida de ne pas attaquer le krak car il savait l'entreprise hasardeuse. Les hospitaliers organisèrent ensuite de nombreux raids sur les convois d'approvisionnement de l'arrière-garde ce qui gêna considérablement la suite de la reconquête musulmane.

Une base arrière lors des conquêtes croisées
De par sa localisation géographique à la frontière entre les royaumes croisés et les terres musulmanes, sa puissance défensive et sa taille (il a pu accueillir jusqu'à 2 000 cavaliers en armes) le krak est une base idéale pour mener des attaques et des raids contre les villes et les forces musulmanes. Ainsi, en 1230, l'émir de Homs refusant de payer son tribut au comte de Tripoli, Templiers et Hospitaliers rassemblent au krak une armée de trois-cents cavaliers et 2 700 piétons puis lancent une série de raids et de pillages qui ravageront les terres autour de Homs jusqu'à ce que l'émir cède. Ces raids sont destructeurs et leur rapidité les rend imparables, le krak servant de point de repli une fois le pillage effectué.

Notes et références
Notes
Références
Bibliographie
Par ordre chronologique de parution :

Guillaume Rey, Études sur les monuments de l'architecture militaire des Croisés en Syrie et dans l'île de Chypre, Imprimerie nationale, Paris, 1871 [lire en ligne] ;
Paul Deschamps, Les châteaux des croisés en Terre Sainte. Le Crac des Chevaliers. Étude historique et archéologique, P. Geuthner, Paris 1934 ;
Paul Deschamps, Terre Sainte Romane, La Pierre-qui-Vire, Zodiaque (collection la nuit des temps no 21), 1964, p. 73-137,  (ISBN 2-7369-0172-X) ;
Jaroslav Folda, Pamela French, Pierre Coupel, Crusader Frescoes at Crac des Chevaliers and Marqab Castle, In: Dumbarton Oaks Papers, 36, 1982, S. 177–210 ;
Jean-Claude Voisin, Le Temps des forteresses en Syrie du nord : VIe – XVe siècles, éd. Terre du Liban, 2000 ;
Collectif, La Méditerranée des Croisades, Citadelles & Mazenod, 2000 ;
Jean Mesqui, Châteaux d’Orient – Liban, Syrie, Hazan, 2001 ;
(en) James Cocks, Le Crac des Chevaliers : The Architecture of Defense, Mimeo, 2002, [lire en ligne] ;
(de) Thomas Biller (ed.), Der Crac des Chevaliers. Die Baugeschichte einer Ordensburg der Kreuzfahrerzeit. Schnell & Steiner, Regensburg 2006,  (ISBN 3-7954-1810-0) ;
(de) John Zimmer, Werner Meyer, M. Letizia Boscardin, Krak des Chevaliers in Syrien. Archäologie und Bauforschung 2003-2007. Deutsche Burgenvereinigung, Braubach 2011,  (ISBN 978-3-927558-33-5) ;
Jean Mesqui, « La “barbacane” du Crac des Chevaliers (Syrie) et la signification du terme dans le bassin méditerranéen », dans Bulletin monumental, 2018, tome 176, no 3, p. 215-234,  (ISBN 978-2-901837-73-2) ;
Jean-Marc Hofman, Emmanuel Pénicaut (dir.), Le Crac des chevaliers. Chroniques d'un rêve de pierre, éditions Hermann/Médiathèque de l'architecture et du patrimoine/Cité de l'architecture & du patrimoine, septembre 2018,  (ISBN 978-2-7056-97624) (Catalogue de l'exposition éponyme à la Cité de l'architecture et du patrimoine du 14 septembre 2018 au 4 mars 2019) ;
Jean Rolin, Crac, P.O.L, 2019 ;
Jean Mesqui et Maxime Goepp, Le Crac des Chevaliers (Histoire et architecture), Paris, Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres (coll. Mémoires de l'AIBL), 462 p. 890 ill., 2019 (présentation sur le site de l'AIBL et des Editions de Boccard).

Annexes
Articles connexes
Liste des forteresses hospitalières d'Orient
Culture de la Syrie ;
Fortifications des croisades ;
Castellologie.
Al-Hosn

Liens externes

Ressources relatives à l'architecture : Liste du patrimoine mondial Structurae 
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online 
Ressource relative à l'audiovisuel : France 24  

UNESCO, La Liste du Patrimoine mondial, Crac des Chevaliers (2006), ref: 1229
Maxime Goepp, Forteresses d'Orient, Crac de l'Hospital
Maquette 3D du Crac des Chevaliers Cité de l'architecture et du patrimoine.

 Portail du Moyen Âge   Portail des croisades   Portail de l’ordre de Saint-Jean de Jérusalem   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail des châteaux   Portail du patrimoine mondial   Portail de la Syrie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 883
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Krak_des_Chevaliers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Krak des Chevaliers (also "Crac des Chevaliers" - 'Castle of the Knights') located near Homs in Syria is widely recognised as the archetypal Crusader castle. Described by T.E. Lawrence (of Arabia) as "perhaps the best preserved and most wholly admirable castle in the world", this somewhat isolated site is located magnificently (750 m or 2,300 ft above sea level) and is, indeed, extremely well-preserved. Today it represents one of the premier tourist attractions in central Syria and is one of the country's world heritage sites. The castle sustained some damage during the Syrian Civil War.

## Understand
Krak des Chevaliers was the easternmost of five Crusader fortifications guarding the only major pass (known as the 'Homs Gap' in the Orontes river Valley) between Antakya in Turkey and Beirut in the Lebanon. The castle was built and expanded at Qal'at al-Hisn by the Order of the Knights of St John in the years between 1142 and 1271. It covers 3 hectares in area and, at the height of its powers, it housed a garrison of up to 2000 men. The castle held out against several fierce attacks (including one by the famous Saladin), and was rumoured to be impregnable. The Krak, however, was eventually lost by the naive crusaders to the Mamluk Sultan Baybars in 1271, who tricked the defenders into abandoning the castle by means of a faked letter from the Crusader Count of Tripoli.
The castle has two main parts: an outer wall with 13 towers and an inner wall and keep. The two walls are separated by a moat (now full of stagnant water), which was used to fill the baths and water the horses. Walk through the main entrance, an imposing gate in the 5m (16ft) thick wall and past the towers which defended the castle, and you enter a courtyard. A corridor covered in delicate carvings leads to a large vaulted hall, where you can see an old oven, a well and some latrines. The chapel in the courtyard was converted to a mosque after Sultan Baybars captured the castle - it still retains its pulpit (mihrab). The top floor of the Tower of the Daughter of the King is now a café with great views.

## Get in
Krak des Chevaliers is an easy day trip from Tartus or Hama, the latter city being the most attractive base from which to visit, if somewhat more distant (one-way microbus trip just under 2 hours). Buses also run from Homs and will drop visitors off at the castle. Bus fares are less than US$1 and the trip takes less than an hour each way. A taxi from Damascus cost around US$60 round trip also including the driver waiting outside, depending on your bargaining skills. Some hotels in Damascus offer bus trips to the castle, but it constitutes a very long day out for the one site.
On the whole, it's best to arrive early as by mid-late morning the castle can be almost submerged in hordes of tourists from Damascus. Sunrise is also a great time to enjoy the view of the castle in a magnificent light. Ditto sunset.

## See
34.75685836.2947131 Krak des Chevaliers (حصن الفرسان).      (updated Jul 2018)

## Do
Take a torch  with you when visiting the castle, as there are many interesting but dark tunnels and rooms within the walls.
Take care when exploring the castle: there are many places to fall off or into.
Check the last bus times if you intend to return to your point of departure, otherwise you could get stuck at the castle overnight!

## Buy
Postcards, booklets and souvenirs are available to purchase at the ticket office and in the various restaurants nearby.

## Eat
Restaurant al-Qalaa, tel: 740 493, 740 003. Housed in a solitary white two-storey building about 1 km south west of the castle on the adjacent hill top (follow the road west of the castle). Magnificent views. The good quality meals are based around grilled chicken and mezze. Alcohol available. The owner is hilarious, shouting at his guests in a dozen languages and adding to the festive atmosphere.
Des Chevaliers, tel: 740 411. Opposite the castle entrance. Serves fairly mediocre buffet meals of mezze, chicken, meat and fruit, or vegetarian options. Has a pleasant shaded patio for outdoor dining.
Castle Restaurant - inside the castle. The dining is in one of the towers on the top level of the keep. The food is mediocre although the prices are reasonable. Offers the standard mezze and meats. Attractive views.

## Sleep
Bebers Hotel, tel: 741 201. Rooms are neat and appealing, all with ensuite bathrooms. Most have magnificent balcony views of the castle Singles US$20, doubles US$25.
34.75538236.2702551 Hotel Francis, ☏ +963 31 730946. Some kilometres away from the Krak with magnificent view of the valley, but not the Krak itself.    (updated Jul 2018)

## Stay safe
See the warning on the Syria article for information on the security .

## Go next
Hike Saydeh Mountain (Starts from the main square in Mashta). Hike details in Syrian Coast and Mountains section.
Hike Mashta to Kafroun (Starts from the main square in Mashta). Hike details in Syrian Coast and Mountains section.
Visit the Virgin Mary memorial statue (Location N34.78818 E36.27550).
Visit St George Monastery (Location N34.767599 E36.268444).



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
CITADEL OF SALADIN
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: fortress
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:29:30


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 5,815
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cairo_Citadel
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Citadel of Cairo or Citadel of Saladin (Arabic: قلعة صلاح الدين, romanized: Qalaʿat Salāḥ ad-Dīn) is a medieval Islamic-era fortification in Cairo, Egypt, built by Salah ad-Din (Saladin) and further developed by subsequent Egyptian rulers. It was the seat of government in Egypt and the residence of its rulers for nearly 700 years from the 13th century until the construction of Abdeen Palace in the 19th century. Its location on a promontory of the Mokattam hills near the center of Cairo commands a strategic position overlooking the city and dominating its skyline. When it was constructed it was among the most impressive and ambitious military fortification projects of its time. It is now a preserved historic site, including mosques and museums.
In addition to the initial Ayyubid-era construction begun by Saladin in 1176, the Citadel underwent major development during the Mamluk Sultanate that followed, culminating with the construction projects of Sultan al-Nasir Muhammad in the 14th century. In the first half of the 19th century Muhammad Ali Pasha demolished many of the older buildings and built new palaces and monuments all across the site, giving it much of its present form. In the 20th century it was used as a military garrison by the British occupation and then by the Egyptian Army until being opened to the public in 1983. In 1979, it was proclaimed by UNESCO as a part of the World Heritage Site Historic Cairo (Islamic Cairo) which was "the new centre of the Islamic world, reaching its golden age in the 14th century."

History
Overview
The Citadel was built on a promontory beneath the Muqattam Hills, a setting that made it difficult to attack. The efficacy of the Citadel's location is further demonstrated by the fact that it remained the heart of Egyptian government until the 19th century. During this long period, the layout and structure of the Citadel was repeatedly altered and adapted to suit the designs of new rulers and new regimes, which makes it difficult to reconstitute its original plan or even its plan in subsequent periods. There have been three major construction periods leading to the Citadel's current form: 12th-century Ayyubid (starting with Saladin), 14th-century Mamluk (under al-Nasir Muhammad), and in the 19th century under Muhammad Ali. The Citadel stopped being the seat of government when Egypt's ruler, Khedive Ismail, moved to his newly built Abdin Palace in the new downtown Cairo in 1874. Despite its elaborate defenses, the Citadel never ended up being subjected to a true siege, though it was implicated on various occasions in the political conflicts within Cairo or Egypt.

General layout
In general, the fortress complex is divided into two parts: the Northern Enclosure (where the National Military Museum is located today), and the Southern Enclosure (where the Mosque of Muhammad Ali is located today). The Northern Enclosure was historically reserved for military garrisons, while the Southern Enclosure was developed as the residence of the sultan. There is also a lower, western enclosure which was historically the site of the royal stables of the Mamluks. However, these functional distinctions were largely erased in the 19th century under Muhammad Ali Pasha, who overhauled the entire site and constructed buildings of various functions throughout the Citadel.
To the west and southwest of the Citadel was a long open field frequently referred to as the "hippodrome" by historians or as the Maydan ("plaza" or "square"). For centuries this was maintained as a training ground (especially for horsemanship) and as a military parade ground. Its outline is still visible in the layout of the roads (mainly Salah ad-Din Street) on this side of the Citadel.
At the northern end of this hippodrome was another square or plaza known as Rumayla Square (Maydan/Midan Rumayla), today known as Salah al-Din Square (Midan Salah ad-Din) or Citadel Square (Midan al-Qal'a). This was used as a horse market (due to its adjacency to the royal stables), but also as an official square for royal and religious ceremonies. It is occupied today by a large roundabout next to which are the massive mosques of Sultan Hassan and al-Rifa'i.

Ayyubid foundation and construction: 12th–13th centuries
Saladin's original construction
The Citadel was begun by the Kurdish Ayyubid ruler Salah al-Din (Saladin) between 1176 and 1183 CE in order to protect Cairo from potential Crusader attacks and to provide a secure center of government for his new regime (only a few years after he had dismantled the Fatimid Caliphate). This also emulated a feature of many Syrian cities, such as Damascus and Aleppo, which had walled citadels that acted as the seat of power and which Saladin was familiar with. Saladin also set out to build a wall, around 20 kilometres long, that would surround both Cairo and Fustat (the nearby former capital), and is recorded as saying: "With a wall I will make the two [cities of Cairo and Fustat] into a unique whole, so that one army may defend them both; and I believe it is good to encircle them with a single wall from the bank of the Nile to the bank of the Nile." The Citadel would be the centerpiece of the wall. While the Citadel was initially completed in 1183–1184, the wall Saladin had envisioned was still under construction in 1238, long after his death. It does not appear to have ever been fully completed after this, though long segments were built.
Saladin charged his chief eunuch and close confidant, Baha al-Din Qaraqush, with overseeing the construction of the new fortifications. Most of the structure was built with limestone quarried from the surrounding Muqattam Hills; however, Qaraqush also quarried a number of minor pyramids at Giza and even as far away as Abusir in order to obtain further materials. He also made use of labour provided by Christian prisoners of war captured in Saladin's victories against the Crusaders. The initial fortress built in Saladin's time consisted essentially of what is today's Northern Enclosure, although not all elements of the Northern Enclosure's current walls are original. The southeast and northeast sections of these walls are likely the closest to their original forms. Also from Saladin's time is the so-called Yusuf's Well, a deep underground well accessed through a spiral staircase which provided water for the fortress. The original southwestern section of Saladin's enclosure has disappeared but is likely to have extended around this well and around the current site of al-Nasir Muhammad's mosque (making the original enclosure slightly bigger than the existing Northern Enclosure today). The carved image of a double-headed eagle, found near the top of one of the towers of the western walls (near the Police Museum), is a curious feature which is popularly attributed to Salah ad-Din's reign. It was probably located elsewhere originally and then moved here at some point when the walls were rebuilt in Muhammad Ali's time. The eagle's heads are missing today, but their original appearance was noted by chroniclers.
Only one original gate, Bab al-Mudarraj, has survived to the present day. It is located along the walls of the Northern Enclosure, nowadays between the Harem Palace (National Military Museum) and the newer Bab al-Jadid gate. It was originally the main gate of the Citadel, but today it is obscured by later constructions from Muhammad Ali's time, including the Bab al-Jadid ("New Gate"). Its name was derived from the carved stone steps (darraj) which led up to it from the path that connected the Citadel to the city below. Like other gateways in Ayyubid military architecture, it had a bent entrance. Today, the inside of the gate's dome-vault is covered in plaster with painted inscriptions belonging to Sultan al-Nasir Muhammad and dated to 1310. It was also on this gate that a foundation inscription was discovered which dates the completion of the Citadel to 1183–1184. Nonetheless, construction of one kind or another almost certainly continued under Saladin's Ayyubid successors.

Construction under Saladin's successors
Construction of the Ayyubid Citadel appears to have continued under Sultan al-'Adil (r. 1200–1218), Saladin's brother and later successor, and was probably finished under the reign of al-Kamil (1218–1238). Al-'Adil had already supervised some of the construction under Saladin, while al-Kamil in turn probably worked on the Citadel during al-'Adil's reign when the latter gave him the viceroyship of Egypt in 1200 (a prelude to becoming sultan later). The rounded towers in the outer walls of the Northern Enclosure date from Saladin's initial construction while the large rectangular towers date to al-Adil's reign. The two large round towers in the far northeastern corner of the enclosure, known as Burj al-Ramla ("Tower of Sand") and Burj al-Hadid ("Tower of Iron") are towers from Saladin's time which al-Kamil subsequently reinforced in 1207.
More significantly, al-Kamil built or completed the palaces in the southern section of the Citadel, and became the first ruler to actually move there in 1206. In addition to the palaces, a number of other structures were built, including a mosque, a royal library, and a "hall of justice". In 1213 al-Kamil also established a horse market on what became Rumayla Square (the square between the Citadel and Sultan Hasan's mosque today), as well as a maydan, a long open square or "hippodrome", to the west and south of the Citadel which was used for equestrian training and military parades. This was on the same site that Ahmad Ibn Tulun established a similar hippodrome in the 9th century. This work established the overall plan of the Citadel area for centuries to come: the northern part of the citadel was devoted to military functions, the southern part to the sultan's private residence and the state administration, and outside, at the southwestern foot of the Citadel, was the parade ground which remained for centuries. Al-Kamil was likely also responsible for building or completing the first water aqueduct which ran along the top of Saladin's city walls to the southwest and brought water from the Nile to the Citadel.
Sultan al-Salih (r. 1240–1249) subsequently moved away from the Citadel again and built himself a new fortified enclosure on Roda Island (which also became the barracks of the Bahri Mamluks who took power after him). Only under the Mamluks, who ruled from 1250 to 1517, did the Citadel finally become the permanent residence of the sultans.

Mamluk period: 13th–16th centuries
Early Bahri Mamluk period
Under the early Bahri Mamluks, the Citadel was continuously developed and the Southern Enclosure in particular was expanded and became the site of important monumental structures. Al-Zahir Baybars, al-Mansur Qalawun, al-Ashraf Khalil and al-Nasir Muhammad each built or rebuilt the audience hall (throne hall), the main mosque, the palaces, or other structures. Unlike the earlier Ayyubid buildings, the Mamluk buildings were increasingly designed to be visible from afar and to dominate the city's skyline. Many of these structures have not survived, with few exceptions.
Baybars (r. 1260–1277) was the first one to split the Citadel into two areas by building the Bab al-Qulla, the gate and wall which today separates the Southern and Northern Enclosures of the Citadel. It was named after a keep tower which he built nearby and which was later torn down by Qalawun. The gate itself was rebuilt again by al-Nasir Muhammad in 1320. The gate was intended to control access to the newly delimited Southern Enclosure which Baybars then developed into a more elaborate and more exclusive royal complex. A part of the Southern Enclosure became reserved for the harem, the private and domestic area of the sultan and his family, while another part became the site of more monumental structures whose functions were more public, ceremonial, or administrative. Among the structures he built here was one called the Dar al-Dhahab ("the Hall of Gold"), which he seems to have used as his private reception hall and which may have been located in the area of the present Police Museum. Another important structure he built in the area is referred to as the Qubba al-Zahiriyya ("the Dome of al-Zahir"), a monumental and richly decorated hall with a central dome which acted as an audience hall or throne hall. It may have been a new structure or an addition to an existing Ayyubid structure, and it was probably the predecessor of al-Nasir Muhammad's "Great Iwan". Baybars also built the Tower of the Lions (Burj al Siba'), a round tower which featured a stone-carved frieze of lions (Baybars' emblem) along its upper parts. The tower was obscured by later construction but its remains, including the lion carvings, were rediscovered in the late 20th century and are now visible on the northwestern side of the Police Museum.
Sultan al-Mansur Qalawun (r. 1279–1290) either built or significantly renovated a structure known as the Dar al-Niyaba which served as the palace of the sultan's vice-regent. He also demolished Baybars' Qubba al-Zahiriyya and replaced it with his own domed structure, the Qubba al-Mansuriyya. More significantly in the long run, Qalawun was the first to create elite regiments of mamluks (soldiers of slave origin) who resided in the various towers of the Citadel, which earned them the name "Burji" Mamluks (Mamluks of the Tower). It was these cohorts of mamluks who would eventually dominate the sultanate during the Burji Mamluk period.
Sultan al-Ashraf Khalil built a qa'a (reception hall) in 1291–1292, referred to as the Qa'a al-Ashrafiyya. Its remains were excavated in the late 20th century and are still visible today, just west of the present-day gate called Bab al-'Alam (Gate of the Flag), across the terrace from the current Police Museum. The remains indicate that the walls of the hall were decorated with multi-coloured marble paneling along the lower walls (a dado), above which was a small frieze of marble mosaics with mother-of-pearl and other marble reliefs, and above all this were panels of glass mosaics with scenes of trees and palaces which are reminiscent of the mosaics of the Ummayyad Mosque and Mausoleum of Baybars in Damascus. (During excavations the mosaics were removed for study and restoration.) The hall also had a central octagonal fountain of marble and the floor was paved with marble mosaics arranged in geometric patterns. It was one of the few structures in this area which al-Nasir Muhammad did not destroy but instead re-used for various purposes, and in the Burji Mamluk period it seems to have replaced the Dar al-Niyaba as the palace of the vice-regent. Al-Ashraf also, once again, demolished the qubba or domed throne hall of his father Qalawun and replaced it with his own structure, the Iwan al-Ashrafiyya (the word "iwan" seems to have been used from then on for this particular type of building). This new throne hall differed from previous incarnations in one notable respect: it was painted with pictures of al-Ashraf's amirs (commanders), each with their rank inscribed above his head.

The reign of Sultan al-Nasir Muhammad
The greatest builder of the Citadel during the Mamluk period was al-Nasir Muhammad, another son of Qalawun, who was sultan three times over a period of nearly fifty years between 1293 and 1341. It was most likely under his reign that the borders of the Southern Enclosure expanded to their current outline, in order to accommodate the new palaces and structures he built. He is responsible for several major works in the Citadel, though unfortunately most of them fell into ruin during the Ottoman period and were finally demolished by Muhammad Ali in the 19th century. In addition to his official palaces and his semi-public monuments in the Southern Enclosure, al-Nasir reserved the southeastern corner of the enclosure (the location of the al-Gawhara Palace today) for the palaces, private courtyard, and garden devoted to his harem (wives and concubines), probably as Baybars had done, called al-Qusur al-Jawwaniyya. He also commissioned new palaces outside the Citadel but nearby for his favourite amirs, and his projects encouraged the development of areas near the Citadel, such as al-Darb al-Ahmar.
In 1312 al-Nasir also ordered the renovation of the water aqueduct which brought water from the Nile to the Citadel. His predecessor, al-Ashraf, is responsible for building an octagonal water intake tower on the shores of the Nile, from which water was raised and transferred along the aqueduct, but al-Nasir completed the project. This improvement of the infrastructure allowed him in turn to embark on more ambitious projects within the Citadel.

The Ablaq Palace (Qasr al-Ablaq)
Among the most important constructions was the Ablaq Palace (Qasr al-Ablaq; sometimes translated as the "Striped Palace"), built in 1313–1314. Its name derived from the red-and-black ablaq masonry that marked its exterior. It may have been partly inspired by the palace of the same name that Sultan Baybars had built in Damascus in 1264 and in which al-Nasir resided when he visited that city. The palace was used for regular receptions and private ceremonies. It was connected to the Great Iwan (see below) by a private passage or corridor which led to the sultan's entrance in the back wall of the Iwan. The walls of the palace itself formed a part of the new outer boundary of the Citadel's enclosure: it was located on an escarpment overlooking the city below, and the escarpment, along with the foundation walls of the palace, acted as the effective outer wall of the Citadel at its western corner. Because of this, al-Nasir was able to build a loggia on the side of the palace from which he could freely observe the activities in the stables and in the maydan (hippodrome) at the foot of the Citadel below, as well as a private door and staircase which gave him direct access between the palace and the hippodrome.

The Great Iwan (al-Iwan al-Kabir)
Al-Nasir demolished, yet again, the Iwan al-Ashrafiyya (throne hall) of his brother al-Ashraf in 1311, and replaced it with his own structure known as the Great Iwan (al-Iwan al-Kabir). This may have been out of a desire to make it appear even more prominent and monumental, as well as to perhaps accommodate larger ceremonies. In any case, he demolished it (either entirely or in part) and rebuilt it yet again in 1333, and it is this incarnation of the Great Iwan which survived up until the 19th century (when it was destroyed during Muhammad Ali's constructions). It was frequently cited by chroniclers as the most impressive structure in Cairo, more monumental than almost any of the Mamluk mosques. It served as the sultan's public and ceremonial throne room and continued to be used (albeit less consistently) by Mamluk sultans after him.

Al-Nasir Muhammad's Mosque
Lastly, al-Nasir's other most notable contribution, and the only major structure of his reign still preserved at the Citadel, was the Mosque of al-Nasir, also situated in the Southern Enclosure. This was built in 1318 on the site of an earlier Ayyubid main mosque which he demolished in order to serve as the new grand mosque of the Citadel. Al-Nasir renovated his mosque again in 1335. Some of its huge columns were also re-used from Pharaonic-era buildings, much like the columns of the Great Iwan. While its structure is well preserved, most of its rich marble paneling decoration was stripped away and shipped to Istanbul by the Ottoman sultan Selim I after his conquest of Egypt.

Later Mamluk period
Subsequent sultans continued to build or add to the palaces and administrative buildings inside the Citadel, though rarely with the same ambition as al-Nasir Muhammad. Sultan al-Salih Isma'il (a son of al-Nasir who reigned from 1342 to 1345) built a richly decorated palace or hall known as al-Duhaysha (the "little wonder") which was inaugurated in February 1344. Likewise, Sultan Hasan (another son of al-Nasir) built a lavish domed palace known as the Qa'a al-Baysariyya, which was completed in 1360. It was over 50 metres tall and, in addition to a main hall covered by a dome, it also had a tower with an apartment for the sultan which was decorated with ivory and ebony. Other private apartments also had domes, while paintings and portraits decorated the walls. Both Isma'il and Hasan were sons of al-Nasir Muhammad. Sultan Hasan also built his massive madrasa-mosque just northwest of the Citadel, off Rumayla Square, in the 1350s and early 1360s (and still standing today). It was so large and tall that in later years it was reportedly used by rebels as a platform from which to bombard the Citadel on more than one occasion.
The Burji Mamluk period saw little construction in the Citadel by comparison with the earlier Mamluk period. The private harem courtyard in the southeastern corner of the Southern Enclosure, known as the hosh, became increasingly used to build new reception halls and other structures with slightly more public functions. The late Burji sultans Qaytbay and al-Ghuri built palaces in this part of the Citadel, on the site of what is now the 19th-century al-Gawhara Palace. Al-Ghuri also restored many other structures in and around the Citadel, including a major restoration/reconstruction of the Citadel's Nile aqueduct. He also restored or reconfigured the Mamluk hippodrome at the southwestern foot of the Citadel, where he installed a vast pool which received water from the restored aqueduct.

Ottoman period: 16th–18th centuries
Egypt was conquered by the Ottoman Empire in 1517 and remained under Ottoman rule for centuries. Sultan Selim I stripped the monumental Mamluk buildings of their precious materials, especially their marble panels and decoration, and shipped them to Istanbul for use in his own building projects.
During this period the Citadel was neglected and many Mamluk structures fell into ruin, although some of the Citadel walls were rebuilt or extended in the 16th–17th centuries. Due to rivalries between different military corps in the Ottoman forces, the Citadel was divided into three areas to house three different elements of the Ottoman garrison: the Northern Enclosure housed the barracks of the Janissaries, the Southern Enclosure was used by the Ottoman pasha (governor) and his own troops, and another lower western enclosure, which contained the stables, housed the 'Azaban (or Azap) corps. Each section had its own mosque and facilities. In between them was a virtual no-man's-land where some of the former grand Mamluk buildings stood abandoned or under-used. This included the Great Iwan of al-Nasir Muhammad, whose large dome collapsed in 1521 and was never rebuilt. The Ablaq Palace was used more productively as a manufacturing center for weaving the Kiswah, the rich cloth covering the Kaaba in Mecca, which continued to come from Cairo until the 20th century.
Some notable structures were still created during this period. The huge round tower near the visitor entrance today, standing at the corner of the Southern and Northern Enclosures, was built by Ibrahim Pasha (the later Grand Vizier under Suleiman the Magnificent) in 1525 and is known as the Burj al-Muqattam ("Tower of the Muqattam Hills"). The round tower at the other corner of the two enclosures (between Bab al-Qulla and Bab al-Wastani), known now as Burj al-Wastani ("Middle Tower"), may also date from this time. The first mosque built in the Citadel after the Mamluk period was the Mosque of Sulayman Pasha in the Northern Enclosure, built by the Ottoman governor in 1528 for use by the Janissaries. It is one of the few mosques in Cairo that represents something close to the classical Ottoman architectural style.

The lower, western enclosure which can be seen today below the Mosque of Muhammad Ali was historically the area which housed the stables of the Citadel. It's not clear when walls were first built around it, though they were likely already enclosed in Mamluk times. This enclosure was occupied by the 'Azaban soldiers, and contains the Mosque of al-'Azab which was built by Ahmad Katkhuda in 1697. (It is possible that Ahmad Katkhuda merely renovated an existing early Burji Mamluk mosque and added the present-day Ottoman-style minaret to it.) The rest of the area is presently occupied by various 19th-century buildings, including storehouses and old factories. The lower enclosure was accessed from the west through the monumental gate called Bab al-'Azab, which was built by Radwan Katkhuda al-Julfi in 1754, probably on the site of an earlier Mamluk gate known as Bab al-Istabl (Gate of the Stables). The gate was modeled on the old Fatimid gate of Bab al-Futuh in the north of Cairo, but its interior facade was later remodeled into a neo-Gothic style during the Khedival period.
The present-dat visitor entrance goes through the small western gate called Bab al-Jabal ("Gate of the Mountain") which was built by the Ottoman governor Yakan Pasha in 1785 when he rearranged the area to build a new palace. Yakan also rebuilt a small stretch of the adjoining wall south of here.

Muhammad Ali: 19th-century
Muhammad Ali was a pasha of Albanian origin who was appointed by the Ottoman sultan in 1805 to restore order after the French occupation of Egypt (1798–1801). However, he subsequently established himself as de facto independent ruler of the country. He consolidated power through a famous and violent coup in 1811 which eliminated the remaining Mamluk class that still formed the country's elites. One of the most pivotal events of this coup took place in the Citadel. Muhammad Ali invited the Mamluk leaders to a celebration banquet in the Citadel, and as they were leaving and passing along the road leading from the upper Citadel to Bab al-Azab, regiments of his Albanian gunmen opened fire from above and massacred all of them.
The Citadel is sometimes referred to as the "Citadel of Muhammad Ali" (Arabic: قلعة محمد علي Qalaʿat Muḥammad ʿAlī). It contains the Mosque of Muhammad Ali, which he built between 1828 and 1848, perched on the summit of the citadel. This Ottoman-style mosque was built in memory of Tusun Pasha, Muhammad Ali's second son who died in 1816. However, it also represents Muhammad Ali's efforts to erase symbols of the Mamluk legacy that he sought to replace. Many of the former Mamluk structures, including the Great Iwan and the Ablaq Palace of al-Nasir Muhammad, were demolished in 1825 to make way for his new mosque and its renovated surroundings. Muhammad Ali himself was eventually buried in the mosque. His mosque also replaced the nearby Mosque of al-Nasir Muhammad as the Citadel's official main mosque. Muhammad Ali's mosque, with its large dome and tall pencil-like Ottoman minarets, is one of the most prominent monuments on Cairo's skyline to this day.

Another obvious change that Muhammad Ali enacted pertained to the uses of the Citadel's northern and southern enclosures: during the Mamluk period the Southern Enclosure was the royal residential area and the Northern Enclosure was mostly military, but Muhammad Ali built his Harem Palace (which now houses the National Military Museum) in the Northern Enclosure, erasing the old functional division between the two sections of the Citadel. He also built or rebuilt some of the walls. Notably, he rebuilt the Bab al-Qulla gate and the surrounding wall which separated the Northern and Southern enclosures from each other, giving it its current look. The gate's form today once again emulates the appearance of Bab al-Futuh but introduces some Turkish elements. In 1825 he also built the gate known as Bab al-Jadid (the "New Gate") at the point where a new carriage road entered the Citadel from the north. Around the same time he built the Bab al-Wastani (or Bab al-Wustani) ("Middle Gate") where the same road continues into the Southern Enclosure (just north of the Bab al-Qulla).
The Citadel eventually ceased to act as the residence of Egypt's ruler after Khedive Isma'il (Muhammad Ali's grandson) moved the court to the new 'Abdin Palace, located in the newly created districts of downtown Cairo, in 1874.

20th century and present day
For many years up to the late 20th century, the Citadel was closed to the public and used as a military garrison and base; at first by the British Army during the British occupation and afterward up to 1946, and since then by the Egyptian military. In 1983, the Egyptian government opened a large part of the Citadel to the public and initiated refurbishment programs to convert some of its old buildings into museums, though the military retains a presence. It is now a major tourist site for both Egyptians and foreigners alike.

Water supply system
Yusuf's Well (Salah ad-Din's Well)
To supply water to the Citadel, Saladin built an 85-metre-deep (280 ft) well known as the Well of Joseph (or Bir Yusuf), so-called because Saladin's birth name, Yūsif, is the Arabic equivalent of Joseph. His chief eunuch and confidant, Qaraqush, who oversaw construction of the Citadel, was also responsible for digging the well. The well is considered a masterpiece of medieval engineering and still exists today. Its shaft was divided into two sections, almost all of which is cut out of the rock itself. The upper part has a wider shaft which is surrounded by a long spiral staircase, separated from the main shaft only by a thin wall of rock. For this reason, the well is also known as the Spiral Well (Bir al-Halazon). The stairs could be covered with earth to make it into a ramp for oxen to travel down to its bottom. The lower part of the well was another shaft descending to the level of underground water seeping in from the Nile. At the bottom of the upper section, two oxen turned a waterwheel that brought the water up from the bottom of the well, while another waterwheel at the top of the well, also powered by oxen, brought the water up the rest of the way.

The Mamluk Aqueduct
During the reign of al-Nasir Muhammad, Saladin's well was insufficient to produce enough water for the Citadel's growing population and for al-Nasir's envisioned construction projects. To increase the volume of water, al-Nasir renovated an Ayyubid aqueduct system (probably originally completed by al-Kamil) and extended it with a new aqueduct system. This system consisted of a number of water wheels on the Nile which raised water to the top of an hexagonal tower (built by his predecessor al-Ashraf Khalil), from which the water was then transported along a series of raised aqueducts to the base of the Citadel. From the foot of the Citadel, the water was then carried up to the palaces via another system of waterwheels. However, since this water supply could not be guaranteed in the event of a siege, Saladin's well was still an essential water source.

The Cistern of Ya'qub Shah al-Mihmandar
This small domed building just outside the Citadel to the east was built in 1495–96 by an amir called Ya'qub Shah al-Mihmandar, a man originally from Erzincan (Turkey) who joined the Mamluk ranks under Sultan Qaytbay. Because of its dome, the building has the look of a mausoleum but it is actually a structure covering access to a cistern. It has an inscription that memorializes the victory of Sultan Qaytbay's army over Ottoman forces at Adana in a battle in 1486. Today it is cut off from the Citadel and stands stranded between two highways (Salah Salem road and Kobri al-Ebageah) which pass right next to the Citadel on its eastern side.

Mosques
There are four main mosques in the Citadel today, some of which are open to visitors:

Mosque of Muhammad Ali
The mosque was built between 1830 and 1848, although not completed until the reign of Said Pasha in 1857. It is located in the Southern Enclosure and is open to the public today. The architect was Yusuf Bushnak from Istanbul and its model was the Sultan Ahmed Mosque in that city. Muhammad Ali Pasha was buried in a tomb carved from Carrara marble, in the courtyard of the mosque. His body was transferred here from Hawsh al-Basha in 1857.

Al-Nasir Muhammad Mosque
Built in 1318, during the early Bahri Mamluk period, as the royal mosque of the Citadel where the sultans of Cairo performed their Friday prayers, today this hypostyle mosque is still similar to how it looked in the 1300s though many repairs have been made and only some of its original decoration has been restored. The parts of the building relying on plastered walls have been reinforced. There have also been attempts to restore the light-blue color of the ceiling. It is located in the Southern Enclosure and is open to the public.

Mosque of Sulayman Pasha
Built in 1528, it was first of the Citadel's Ottoman-style mosques and is one of the few structures in Cairo closely resembling the "classical" Ottoman style of the 16th century. It is located in the Northern Enclosure, just northeast of the Harim Palace (Military Museum). It was built on the ruins of the earlier Mosque of Sidi Sariyya built by Abu-Mansur Qasta, an amir in the Fatimid era (predating the Citadel). Qasta's tomb, dated to 1140 CE, still exists in the mosque today.

Mosque of al-'Azab
This lesser-known mosque is situated right behind the main western gate, Bab al-'Azab. Both are named after the Ottoman military regiments known as 'Azaban (or Azaps) who were housed in this part of the Citadel during the Ottoman period. The mosque was built by the Mamluk amir Ahmad Katkhuda in 1697, but it has been argued that it incorporates, or was a renovation of, an earlier Mamluk mosque or religious structure. Although not publicly accessible, it can be spotted by its pointed Ottoman-style minaret.

Museums
The Citadel also contains several museums:

Egyptian Military museum
The official museum of the Egyptian Army. The museum was established in 1937 at the old building of the Egyptian Ministry of War in downtown Cairo. It was later moved to a temporary location in the Garden City district of Cairo. In November 1949 the museum was moved to the Harem Palace at the Cairo citadel. It has been renovated several times since, in 1982 and 1993.

Al-Gawhara Palace Museum
Also known as Bijou Palace, is a palace and museum commissioned by Muhammad Ali Pasha in 1814. The palace was designed and constructed by artisans contracted from a variety of countries, including Greeks, Turks, Bulgarians and Albanians. Muhammad Ali's official divan or audience hall, where the pasha received guests, contains a 1,000 kg chandelier sent to him by Louis Philippe I of France. The palace also contains the throne of Muhammad Ali Pasha that was a gift from the King of Italy.

Carriage Museum
Inaugurated in 1983, it houses a collection of unique Royal Carriages attributed to different historical periods, from the reign of Khedive Ismail until the reign of King Farouk, in addition to other collection of unique antiques related to the carriages.

Police Museum
The museum (also sometimes referred to as the Prison Museum) is just north of the gate known as Bab al-'Alam, on a terrace commanding sweeping views of the city below. It is housed in the Citadel's former prison and contains exhibits on topics such as famous political assassinations and displays of the murder weapon used.

Notes
References
External links

Cairo Citadel (Arabic)
Qal'a (Citadel) at ArchNet



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
NORIAS OF HAMA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: historical_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:29:38


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,331
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norias_of_Hama
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Norias of Hama (Arabic: نواعير حماة) are a series of 17 norias, historic water-raising machines for irrigation, along the Orontes River in the city of Hama, Syria. They are tall water wheels with box-like water collection compartments embedded around their rims. As the river flows, it pushes these water collection boxes under water, where they quickly fill up, then are driven up to the top of the wheel where they empty into an aqueduct. The aqueduct can carry the water to supply buildings, gardens and farmland.
Seventeen of Hama's original norias have been conserved. They are notable for their medieval origins, for their large number and for the enormous size of two of them - for nearly 500 years the tallest waterwheels in the world. In the 21st century Hama's norias no longer provide a water supply but are celebrated as an example of advanced water supply technology in medieval Muslim societies and for the striking sights and sounds which they make as they turn. In 2006 the older of the two gigantic norias, the Noria al-Muhammadiya (1361 CE), was accorded Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark designation by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers as marking a major step forward in technology internationally.

Early history
There are strong grounds for believing that many norias were operating in Hama at least by late 12th century CE. Specific dates are known for the two exceptionally large norias from their inscriptions: Noria al-Muhammadiya created in 1361 CE and Noria al-Ma’muriyya in 1453 CE.
However, it is wholly possible that some norias were operating in Hama some centuries earlier. A 13th century regional historian wrote that norias existed in Hama in the late 9th century CE. Norias were in use near Hama by 350 CE, judging from mosaic and tiles bearing images of norias which have been found at Apamea, a Aramic city, also on the Orontes, 30 miles / 55 km downstream from Hama. These images of norias show a strikingly similar design to those in Hama today.
In the mid-7th century CE, the area around Hama was conquered and absorbed into the expanding Muslim Arab state. The latter assiduously mastered new technologies which it encountered - like norias - improved them and expanded their uses. The very first norias in Hama might have been built in the Roman / Byzantine period or they might have been built by the subsequent Muslim society, using the established local design.
An obvious reason for building norias at Hama is the Orontes’ lack of gradient combined with the height of its banks, which make this the most practical option for drawing irrigation water from the river.
Dates for these norias’ origins refer to the original noria at a site because, like all functioning historic waterwheels, Hama's norias have been repeatedly repaired and rebuilt over the centuries, since wooden parts continually need replacing. On one estimate, if well maintained, a noria will have undergone complete replacement of its wooden parts every 15 years. In Hama such maintenance of norias is carried out by families of skilled noria carpenters who pass this role down the generations, a practice which has survived until present times.

Features of the Hama norias
The water wheels
The wheels are the ‘undershot’ type, driven by water flowing underneath them and pushing the wheel's paddles. In terms of height, the tallest of the norias is 21 metres (69 feet) in diameter and the smallest is 7 metres (23 feet). At least five of these norias are 17 metres (56 feet) or larger. These wheels are made from different woods for different parts. The massive axles and bearings are walnut wood, while poplar was widely used for other parts of the wheel and pine and oak have also been mentioned. Small wooden water collection compartments are embedded all along the rim of the water wheel in between the paddles with which the river drives the wheel. They are like boxes with half of one side open and with a spout whereby the water pours out at the highest point of rotation (see close-up photo below). Most Hama norias have a water collection box between every pair of paddles. But on some they are more widely spaced, for instance one box between every five paddles. In water-bearing capacity, across different norias the boxes range from 4 to 12 litres (1 to 3 US gallons). The water delivery of Hama's norias ranges between 50,000 and 200,000 litres per hour, depending on a noria's size (13,200 to 52,800 US gallons). Brief descriptions of each of 14 norias in Hama are provided in the report by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers concerning its designation of the Noria al-Muhammadiya as a Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark.

The weirs
Hama's norias are always immediately downstream from a weir, a low dam which ensures that river power is concentrated through a channel leading to the noria's wheel. When river levels are low, all water may flow through the noria channel in the weir; when the river is high, surplus water simply flows over the weir. There are often additional channels in these weirs and sluice gates to fine tune river pressure on the water wheel and hence the speed with which a noria turns. Al Dbiyat's description of the Hama norias contains a diagram which conveys these features clearly. Sometimes two, three or even four norias share the same weir, with one or two norias on each side of the river. This clustering of norias is evident on Al Dbiyat's map of the Hama norias  and to a discerning viewer on satellite view maps of Hama. Sometimes a weir is constructed at an angle to a noria so as to concentrate river power to the maximum on the channel leading to the wheel.

The aqueducts
The norias discharge water into aqueducts built on tall stone arches. To catch the water, each aqueduct has a very short section parallel to the water wheel and the river. This joins at 90 degrees the main section of the aqueduct, which leads away from the river and was sometimes many hundreds of metres long. Some aqueducts receive water from two norias of the same height, one on each side of the short section parallel to the water wheel. Much of the aqueducts’ length has now been demolished and today few aqueducts continue very far.

Water sharing systems
When the norias were being used for irrigation, the aqueducts eventually fed into water channels which each supplied multiple fruit and vegetable gardens. While most Hama norias were owned by wealthy landowners, their costs, maintenance and their water were shared on an orderly collective basis by each noria's water users. Such systems for orderly sharing of water are widely practised in traditional Muslim societies. Gardeners often timeshare the water through quickly adjusting small makeshift dams of stones and rags which direct the flow at branches of water channels.

The Noria al-Muhammadiya
This gigantic wheel is 21 metres (69 feet) in diameter. It was built to supply water to the Great Mosque of Hama one kilometre away (0.63 mile) and it also supplied a public hammam (bath-house) and fountains, houses, and gardens nearby. A construction date of 1361 CE is established by an inscription on its aqueduct, stating year 763 of the Islamic calendar.
This noria has 120 water collection boxes embedded in its rim. They raise 200,000 litres of water per hour (52,800 US gallons). The wheel takes one minute to complete a revolution, much longer than smaller norias.
To drive a wheel bearing such a weight of water, an extraordinarily long weir at a very acute angle was built to concentrate the power of the river on the base of the wheel. This arrangement can be seen clearly on satellite view maps of Hama.
For nearly 500 years, the Noria al-Muhammadiya was the tallest waterwheel in the world. In 1854 it was surpassed by the Laxey Wheel, a mine-pumping waterwheel on the Isle of Man, an island between England and Ireland. The Laxey Wheel is only marginally taller, with a diameter of 22.1 metres (73 feet).

From irrigation devices to heritage attractions
From the 1930s to late 1950s Hama's norias were competing with new irrigation pumps driven by petrol or diesel engines. Motorised pumps offered entrepreneurial farmers a means to get extra water to grow more food for expanding populations. A severe blow to the norias came in 1960 with the building of the Rastan dam upstream from Hama. This reduced water levels in the Orontes so that for several months of the year Hama's norias could no longer operate and motorised pumps became the only means for continuous irrigation. Spells of non-use causes the wood in the norias to dry, shrink and crack, which makes maintenance costly. By 1970 the number of norias in use had fallen to eight, from the 20 noted by Danish archaeologists in Hama in the 1930s. Between 1977 and 1981 six norias were restored.
In February 1982 the army of Syria's first Baathist dictator, Hafez al-Assad, launched a massive attack on Hama to crush an armed uprising by the Muslim Brotherhood. For three weeks the city was bombed by aeroplanes, shelled by artillery and tanks, and finally large areas were demolished with dynamite and bulldozers. Many thousands of Hama citizens were killed. Heritage buildings like Hama's Great Mosque were levelled to the ground and large parts of historic Hama were rendered wholly unrecognisable. According to Hafez al-Assad's favoured British biographer, “about a third of the historic inner city was demolished…. The whole of Hama was reshaped on a grand scale”. Concerning impact on Hama's norias, information is scarce because the Assad government firmly discouraged mention of the 1982 events. According to a non-government source, it seems that the wooden norias themselves did not suffer widespread damage and were turning again within months. An important unanswered question is whether it was in 1982 that the norias’ stone aqueducts suffered the extensive demolition which now precludes any useful delivery of water.

The Assad government selectively rebuilt a limited part of historic Hama, like the Great Mosque, and landscaped or redeveloped the rest. The norias played an important part in the government's promotion of Hama as a tourist destination. The restoration of norias continued, reaching a peak in 1988 when seven norias were restored. The result has been 17 norias which rotate and raise water but cannot deliver it far because their aqueducts are now cut short. They function as a popular heritage attraction, floodlit during events like the Hama Spring Festival when the Orontes flows well and the norias can turn. By day or night they can be visually spectacular, catching light in the curtains of spray dripping from their water-boxes or casting huge rotating shadows. Sound wise, many of Hama's norias emit the powerful groaning, droning or buzzing sounds from their thick wooden axles, which gave norias their name. A time-honoured sport among Hama youths is to ride on moving norias, sometimes diving into the river from the top, as displayed in an on-line video from 2005. Much of the illustration and information now available about Hama's norias derives from these 17 norias during the period between the 1980s and the 2011 Syrian civil war. In 1999 the Syrian government applied to UNESCO for the norias of Hama to be designated a World Heritage Site.

Hama’s norias and the Syrian civil war
Hama's norias were largely spared damage during the civil war which began in 2011. Since Hama was famous as a conservative and militant Sunni Muslim city, where hatred of the secular Baathist dictatorship had been intensified by the 1982 massacre, it was an expected focal point for rebellion. Accordingly, the dictatorship of Bashar Assad made strenuous efforts to retain control of Hama from the outset. In July and August 2011 it used massive lethal force against large crowds of demonstrators in Hama. Subsequently, the Assad government retained control of the city so Hama never suffered the air raids which the government inflicted on areas controlled by its opponents.
Most of Hama's norias have survived. The American Association for the Advancement of Science compared pre-war satellite photos of 10 noria sites in Hama with those from 2014 and concluded that no major damage had occurred. However, one noria was burned deliberately in 2014, some have been pillaged for timber, and others are suffering from lack of maintenance. A mid-2020 article in the on-line English language magazine Arab Weekly interviewed traditional noria craftsmen who were restoring Hama's Noria al-Muhammadiya and also a Hama official responsible for the norias. While local citizen initiatives to revive the norias were underway, it was proving difficult for lack of money for materials and a serious shortage of suitably skilled traditional noria craftsmen, owing to death or emigration during the conflict.

Gallery
References
Further reading
Delpech, Annette; Girard, Francois; Robine, Gerard, Roumi, Muhammad (1997) Les Norias de l’Oronte. Institut francais de Damas, Damascus, Syria
This 240-page French language book, much illustrated and including maps, gives the definitive account of the norias of Hama.

Samman, Mahmod (2006) Noria al-Muhammadiya: Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark. American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
This 11-page English language booklet, full text available on the internet, summarises key facts about the Hama norias, drawing on the book by Delpech et al.

Al Dbiyat, Mohamed (2009) ‘Les norias de Hama sur l'Oronte, un système traditionnel original de l'utilisation de l'eau fluviale’, in Gestion durable et équitable de l’eau douce en Méditerranée, mémoire et traditions, avenir et solutions. Conference proceedings from Cinquièmes Rencontres Internationales Monaco et la Méditerranée Monaco, 26–28 March 2009.
This 18-page French language chapter also draws on the book by Delpech et al and has a focus on water usage. Maps and diagrams are included. Full text available via the ResearchGate website.

External links
Sound and video of Norias on Sound Tourism site
‘Hama’s Majestic Norias’
‘Digital Hama: a Window on Syria’s Past’ Historical Knowledge, National Museum of Denmark
'[1]Google NotebookLM on Water Wheels of Hama


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 980
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%86%D9%88%D8%A7%D8%B9%D9%8A%D8%B1_%D8%AD%D9%85%D8%A7%D8%A9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

نواعير حماة وهي آلات مائية خشبية تدور بالقوة المائية وتتواجد على شواطئ نهر العاصي في مدينة حماة. وتنقل الماء منه بواسطة صناديق إلى حوض علوي ومنه يجري في قنوات محمولة على قناطر ليسقي المدينة وبساتينها. أطلق عليها لقب «أروع نواعير بنيت على الإطلاق» ، وأُدخلت في القائمة الإرشادية المؤقتة لمواقع التراث العالمي لليونسكو عام 1999 ، وكذلك في قائمة المعالم التاريخية للهندسة الميكانيكية

وأصل تسمية الناعورة لغوياً من فعل نَعَر بمعنى أحدث صوتاً فيه نعير، والنعير هو صوت يصدر من أقصى الأنف وسميت بالناعورة لصوتها.

تاريخ النواعير
وهي من الأوابد الأثرية يمكن أن نذكر النواعير القائمة على نهر العاصي وخاصة في مدينة حماة في سوريا وهذا ما جعل بعض المؤرخين يطلقون على هذه المدينة اسم مدينة النواعير بالإضافة لاسمها الآخر وهو مدينة أبي الفداء. ويعود تاريخ النواعير إلى عهد الآراميين، وتبين الآثار السورية منحوتات ولوحات أثرية عن النواعير، مثل لوحة الفسيفساء الرائعة التي اكتشفت في شارع الأعمدة بمدينة أفاميا الأثرية على بعد 55 كم شمال مدينة حماة ويرجع تاريخ اللوحة إلى 420 م وتمثل صورة طبق الأصل للناعورة (اللوحة موجودة في متحف دمشق الوطني) وكذلك الآثار بالقرب من قلعة شيزر.

وصف الناعورة
الناعورة، هي عبارة عن آلة مائية دائرية دائمة الحركة مخصصة لرفع الماء من النهر وعبر القناطر إلى البساتين على جانبي النهر، وتتكون من دولاب خشبي ضخم يدور حول محور خشبي من خشب الجوز حصرا يدعى القلب يرتكز على قواعد خشبية متوضعة على قواعد حجرية ثابتة وقوية في قاع النهر.

مكونات الناعورة
القلب وهو مركز دائرة الناعور
الكفت بكسر الكاف فهي عبارة عن ساندات كالوسائد تحت القلب تصنع من خشب الجوز
الصر قطع خشبية سميكة في محيط القلب تصنع من خشب المشمش
الأعتاب وعددها 16 عتبة مهما اختلف حجم الناعورة من خمسة أمتار وحتى 25 مترا
الوشاحات وتصنع من شجر الحور وعددها اثنان وثلاثون وشاحا لكل ناعورة
القيود وتصنع من خشب الجوز أو التوت تصل بين الوشاح والآخر
الدائرة تجمع على دوائر وهي دائرتان لكل ناعورة والغالب تصنع من خشب الجوز
الأطابيع تصنع من خشب السنديان بين الدائرة والوشاح
الرادين وهو جمع رادينة وخشبها من التوت وتدق رؤوسها العليا عبر ورشة من الأسافين
أسافين جمع إسفين وهي أخشاب صغيرة تدق في الأسفل الداخلي للدائرة العليا من الناعورة
قبون وهو عبارة عن طبقتين من الأخشاب تشكل أسفل وأعلى الصندوق
القراعات أخشاب مصنوعة بغاية الدقة وتثبت الرادين من الأطراف الأربعة
الميازيب وهي ومنها ينصب الماء في الناعورة
الطبق وهو يشكل جانبي الصندوق
الصندوق وهو لجمع وحمل الماء من النهر إلى أعلى الناعور لصب في القناة
الريش وهي من خشب الجوز لإعطاء قوة دوران للناعورة
الجامعات وهي من خشب الشوح أو الحور وهي مخصصة لزيادة دوران الناعورة
عضايض خشب واصل من الجامهات وماحولها
الأبواب تصنع من خشب الشوح وهي عريضة مثبت واحدة فوق وشاحين متقابلين تتحرك عن دخول دوران الناعورة إلى الماء

دورها في الزراعة
لعبت النواعير دورًا أساسيًا في الاقتصاد الزراعي لأنها في الأساس وسيلة مبتكرة من وسائل الري، وإذا كان دورها في هذا المجال قد بدأ يقل شيئا فشيئًا بسبب استخدام الوسائل الحديثة ومضخات الماء الكهربائية (الموتورات) فإن أهميتها السياحية لم تنقص بتاتًا بل زادت وأصبحت نواعير حماة رمزًا ومعلمًا سياحيًا عالميًا. تتوقف أفواج السياح في مدينة حماة للتمتع بمنظر النواعير أو لدراسة حركتها.

وظيفة الناعورة
الناعورة هي آلة مائية ذات حركة دائمة معدة لرفع الماء مؤلفة من أخشاب ومسامير حديدية وهي سواقي مقامة على النهر ونواعير حماة هي أكبر وأقدم نواعير في العالم، وعن كيفية عملها تغطس الناعورة أثناء دورانها بالماء وصناديقها منقلبة فارغة وترتفع ملآنة بالماء من النهر وتصب الماء في قناة ذات قناطر متعددة وتسقي به البساتين وأكثر الحمامات وبعض الدور والجوامع والخانات والمقاهي.
وظيفة الناعورة هي حمل الماء إلى مستوى أعلى من مستوى النهر لتيسير الاستفادة منه نظرًا لانخفاض مجرى نهر العاصي في أراضي حماة عن مستوى الحوض الذي ينساب فيه انخفاضًا كبيرًا قد يصل إلى سبعين مترًا في بعض الأماكن فقد أصبح من المتعذر الاستفادة من مياهه إلا باستخدام وسائل الري التي تلائم هذا الانخفاض الكبير فكانت الناعورة خير وسيلة توصل إليها الإنسان في سورية منذ أكثر من الفي عام، وتدور الناعورة دورة كاملة كل عشرين ثانية تعطي خلالها 2400 لتر من الماء .

في التاريخ
برع السوريون القدماء في شتى نواحي العلوم، والكثير من الحضارات التي قامت فوق الأرض السورية بامتدادها من البحر المتوسط حتى حدود الجزيرة السورية شرقا قدم الإنسان السوري الكثير بشتى أنواع العلوم وتخطيط المدن والقوانين والعبادات وتدجين الحيوانات والزراعة والفلك والمعارف والابتكارات الأولى في التاريخ البشري وابتكروا طرق وأساليب كثيرة تتعلق بالزراعة والري منها القنوات المائية التي يوجد منها في عدة مواقع أثرية في سورية ومنها النواعير وأقدم صورة للناعورة نجدها في لوحة من الفسيفساء يعود تاريخها للقرن الرابع قبل الميلاد وقد تم العثور عليها في مدينة أفاميا الأثرية بالقرب من حماة وهي موجودة اليوم في حديقة المتحف الوطني في دمشق.
وقد لاحظ الرحالة وجود النواعير في مدينة حماة حيث نجد الرحالة ابن جبير يقول عنها:

كما أن الرحالة ابن بطوطة يقول عن حماة:

أما المؤرخ أبو الفداء الذي كان ملكا على حماة فقال عن مدينته هذه ونواعيرها

النواعير حديثا
في بداية القرن العشرين كان عدد النواعير في مدينة حماة والأراضي التابعة لها 105 نواعير منها 25 داخل مدينة حماة نفسها ولم يعد يوجد اليوم من كل هذه النواعير إلا حوالي 40 ناعورة في حالة العمل منها داخل المدينة 19 ناعورة تنتظم في خمس مجموعات هي:

مجموعة البشريات: تقع في مدخل حماة من جهة الشرق وتضم أربع نواعير وهي تتكون من مجموعتين فرعيتين كل منهما يتكون من ناعورتين هما البشريتان والعثمانيتان.
مجموعة الجسريات: وهي تتكون من أربع نواعير أيضا" وهم ناعورة الجسرية والمأمورية والمؤيدية والعثمانية وهي من أجمل النواعير في العالم.
مجموعة الكيلانيات: وهي تتألف من أربعة نواعير أيضاََ ثلاثة منها على الضفة اليسرى وواحدة فقط على الضفة اليمنى وتحمل الأسماء التالية الجعبرية والطوافرة والكيلانية.
مجموعة شمال القلعة: تقع في محلة باب الجسر على الطرف الشمالي لقلعة حماة وهي ثلاث نواعير اثنتان منها على الضفة اليسرى وواحدة منها على الضفة اليمنى للنهر وتحمل التسميات التالية الخضر والدوالك والدهشة.
مجموعة باب النهر: وهي تتكون من أربع نواعير اثنتان منها لا تزالان قيد العمل المحمدية والقاق واثنتان أخران قد زالتا من الوجود من قبل حوالي نصف قرن وهما العونية والبركة.

معرض الصور
المراجع
فهرس المراجع
للاستزادة
مجلة العربي العدد 484 ص 140



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
APAMEA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:29:46


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 208
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apamea
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Apamea or Apameia (Ancient Greek: Απάμεια) is the name of several Hellenistic cities in western Asia, after Apama, the Sogdian wife of Seleucus I Nicator, several of which are also former bishoprics and Catholic titular see.
Places called Apamea include:

Asia Minor (Turkey)
Apamea (Euphrates), in Osroene, opposite Zeugma on the Euphrates, now flooded by the Birecik Dam
Apamea (Phrygia) or Apamea Cibotus, formerly Kibotos, commercial center of Phrygia, near Celaenae, now at Dinar, Afyonkarahisar Province; former bishopric and now a Latin Catholic titular bishopric
Apamea Myrlea or Apamea in Bithynia, formerly Myrlea and Brylleion, in Bithynia, on the Sea of Marmara; currently near Mudanya, Bursa Province; former archdiocese, Latin Catholic titular archbishopric

Iraq
Apamea (Babylonia), on the Tigris near the Euphrates, precise location unknown
Apamea (Sittacene), on the Tigris, precise location unknown

Iran (Persia)
Apamea (Media), in Media, near Laodicea (Nahavand, Iran), precise location unknown
Apamea Ragiana, south of the Caspian Gates, in Parthia (later Media)

Syria
Apamea, Syria, on the Orontes River, northwest of Hama, Syria, a former Roman provincial capital and Metropolitan Archbishopric, now
Latin Catholic titular Metropolitan archbishopric
Melkite Catholic titular Metropolitan archbishopric
Syriac Catholic Catholic titular Metropolitan archbishopric
Greek Orthodox titular bishopric
Maronite Catholic titular bishopric

See also
Treaty of Apamea
Apama (disambiguation)


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 966
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A3%D9%81%D8%A7%D9%85%D9%8A%D8%A9_(%D8%B9%D8%AB%D8%A9)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

أفامية (الاسم العلمي: Apamea)، جنس عثث من فصيلة الليليات. وصفت من قبل فيرديناند أوشسينهايمر لأول مرة في عام 1816.
بعض أنواع الأفامية هي آفات. يرقة Apamea niveivenosa هي دودة قارضة تُعرف باسم آفة محاصيل الحبوب في أمريكا الشمالية. يرقة A. apamiformis هي دودة الأرز، وهي أخطر الآفات الحشرية للأرز البري المزروع في الغرب الأوسط الأعلى للولايات المتحدة.
والجنس سُمي على أفاما زوجة سلوقس الأول.

أنواع مختارة
Apamea acera (Smith, 1900)
Apamea albina (Grote, 1874)
Apamea alia (Guenée, 1852)
Apamea alpigena (Boisduval, [1837])
Apamea alticola (Smith, 1891)
Apamea altijuga (Kozhantshikov, 1925)
الدودة القارضة ذات الرأس الأصفر ‏ (Fitch, 1857) – دودة قارضة صفراء الرأس
Apamea anceps (Denis & Schiffermüller, 1775) – جوز الطيب الكبير
Apamea antennata (Smith, 1891)
Apamea apamiformis (Guenée, 1852) –دودة الأرز أو دودة الأرز البري
Apamea aquila Donzel, 1837
Apamea arabs (Oberthür, 1881)
Apamea assimilis (Doubleday, 1847)
Apamea atriclava (Barnes & McDunnough, 1913)
Apamea atrosuffusa (Barnes & McDunnough, 1913) (syn. A. grotei (Barnes & McDunnough, 1914))
Apamea auranticolor (Grote, 1873)
Apamea baischi Hacker, 1989
Apamea barbara (Berio, 1940)
Apamea basimacula Boisduval, 1833
Apamea bernardino Mikkola & Mustelin 2000
Apamea boopis (Hampson, 1908)
Apamea brunnea (Leech, 1900)
Apamea brunnescens Kononenko, 1985
Apamea burgessi (Morrison, 1874)
Apamea caesia Hreblay & Ronkay, 1998
Apamea cariosa (Guenée, 1852) – nondescript dagger moth
Apamea centralis (Smith, 1891)
Apamea chalybeata (Walker, 1865)
Apamea chhiringi Hreblay, 1998
Apamea chinensis (Leech, 1900)
Apamea cinefacta (Grote, 1881)
Apamea cogitata (Smith, 1891) – thoughtful apamea
Apamea commixta (Butler, 1881)
Apamea commoda (Walker, 1857) – southern Quaker
Apamea commoda commoda (Walker, 1857)
Apamea commoda parcata (Smith, 1903)
Apamea commoda striolata Mikkola, 2009
Apamea concinna (Leech, 1900)
Apamea contradicta (Smith, 1895) – northern banded Quaker
Apamea crenata Hufnagel, 1766 – clouded-bordered brindle
Apamea cristata (Grote, 1878)
Apamea cuculliformis (Grote, 1875)
Apamea cyanea (Hampson, 1908)
Apamea desegaulxi Viette, 1928
الدودة القارضة الزجاجية ‏ Brace, 1819 – glassy cutworm
Apamea digitula Mikkola and Mustelin, 2006
Apamea dubitans (Walker, 1856) – doubtful apamea
Apamea epomidion (Haworth, 1809) – clouded brindle
Apamea erythrographa Hreblay, Peregovits & Ronkay, 1999
Apamea euxinia Hacker, 1985
Apamea exstincta (Staudinger, 1892)
Apamea fasciata (Leech, 1900)
Apamea fergusoni Mikkola & Lafontaine, 2009
Apamea ferrago (Eversmann, 1837)
Apamea fervida (Hampson, 1908)
Apamea furva (Denis & Schiffermüller, 1775) – the confused
Apamea gabrieli Mikkola & Mustelin 2000
Apamea ganeshi Hreblay, 1998
Apamea gangtoki Hreblay & Ronkay, 1998
Apamea geminimacula (Dyar, 1904)
Apamea genialis (Grote, 1874)
Apamea glenura (Swinhoe, 1895)
Apamea glenurina Hreblay & Ronkay, 1999
Apamea goateri Hacker, 2001
Apamea goperma Hreblay & Ronkay, 1999
Apamea gratissima Hreblay & Ronkay, 1999
Apamea griveaudi Viette, 1967
Apamea groenlandica (Duponchel, [1838])
Apamea hampsoni Sugi, 1963
Apamea heinickei Hreblay, 1998
Apamea helva (Grote, 1875) – yellow three-spot
Apamea illyria Freyer, 1846
Apamea impedita (Christoph, 1887)
Apamea impulsa (Guenée, 1852)
Apamea indocilis (Walker, 1856) – ignorant apamea
Apamea inebriata Ferguson, 1977 – drunk apamea
Apamea inficita (Walker, 1857) – lined Quaker
Apamea inordinata (Morrison, 1875)
Apamea kaszabi Varga, 1982
Apamea kumari Hreblay & Ronkay, 1999
Apamea lateritia (Hufnagel, 1766) – scarce brindle
Apamea leucodon (Eversmann, 1837)
Apamea lieni Hreblay, 1998
Apamea lignea (Butler, 1889)
Apamea lignicolora (Guenée, 1852) – wood-coloured Quaker
Apamea lintneri Grote, 1873
Apamea lithoxylaea Denis & Schiffermüller, 1775 – light arches
Apamea longula (Grote, 1879)
Apamea lutosa (Andrews, 1877) – opalescent apamea
Apamea lysis (Fawcett, 1917)
Apamea macronephra Berio, 1959
Apamea magnirena (Boursin, 1943)
Apamea maraschi (Draudt, 1934)
Apamea maroccana (Zerny, 1934)
Apamea maxima (Dyar, 1904)
Apamea michielii Varga, 1976
Apamea mikkolai Hreblay & Ronkay, 1998
Apamea minnecii (Berio, 1939)
Apamea minoica (Fibiger, Schmidt & Zilli, 2005)
Apamea monoglypha Hufnagel, 1766 – dark arches
Apamea nekrasovi Mikkola, Gyulai & Varga, 1997
Apamea nigrior (Smith, 1891) – black-dashed apamea, dark apamea
Apamea nigrostria Hreblay, Peregovits & Ronkay, 1999
Apamea niveivenosa (Grote, 1879) – snowy-veined apamea
Apamea nubila Moore, 1881
Apamea obliviosa (Walker, 1858)
Apamea oblonga (Haworth, 1809) – crescent striped
Apamea occidens (Grote, 1878) – western apamea
Apamea ontakensis Sugi, 1982
Apamea ophiogramma Esper, 1793 – double lobed
Apamea pallifera (Grote, 1877)
Apamea permixta Kononenko, 2006
Apamea perpensa (Grote, 1881)
Apamea perstriata (Hampson, 1908)
Apamea platinea (Treitschke, 1825)
Apamea plutonia (Grote, 1883) – dusky Quaker, dusky apamea
Apamea polyglypha (Staudinger, 1892)
Apamea pseudoaltijuga Grosser, 1985
Apamea purpurina (Hampson, 1908)
Apamea quinteri Mikkola & Lafontaine, 2009
Apamea rectificata Hreblay & Plante, 1995
Apamea relicina (Morrison, 1875)
Apamea relicina relicina (Morrison, 1875)
Apamea relicina migrata (Smith, [1904])
Apamea remissa Hübner, 1809 – dusky brocade
Apamea reseri Hreblay & Ronkay, 1998
Apamea robertsoni  Mikkola and Mustelin, 2006
Apamea roedereri Viette, 1976
Apamea rubrirena (Treitschke, 1825)
Apamea rufa (Draudt, 1950)
Apamea rufomedialis (Marumo, 1920)
Apamea rufus (Chang, 1991)
Apamea sanyibaglya Hreblay & Ronkay, 1998
Apamea schawerdae (Draeseke, 1928)
Apamea scolopacina (Esper, 1788) – slender brindle
Apamea scoparia Mikkola, Mustelin & Lafontaine, 2000
Apamea shibuyoides Poole, 1989
Apamea sicula (Turati, 1909)
Apamea sinuata (Moore, 1882)
Apamea siskiyou Mikkola & Lafontaine, 2009
Apamea smythi Franclemont, 1952
Apamea sodalis (Butler, 1878)
Apamea sora (Smith, 1903)
Apamea sordens Hufnagel, 1766 – rustic shoulder-knot
Apamea spaldingi (Smith, 1909) – Spalding's Quaker
Apamea stagmatipennis (Dyar, 1920)
Apamea striata Haruta & Sugi, 1958
Apamea sublustris (Esper, [1788]) – reddish light arches
Apamea submarginata (Leech, 1900)
Apamea submediana (Draudt, 1950)
Apamea superba (Turati, 1926)
Apamea syriaca (Osthelder, 1932)
Apamea tahoeensis Mikkola & Lafontaine, 2009
Apamea taiwana (Wileman, 1914)
Apamea terranea (Butler, 1889)
Apamea unanimis (Hübner, [1813]) – small clouded brindle
Apamea unita (Smith, 1904)
Apamea verbascoides (Guenée, 1852) – boreal apamea, mullein apamea
Apamea veterina (Lederer, 1853)
Apamea vicaria (Püngeler, 1902)
Apamea vulgaris (Grote & Robinson, 1866) – common apamea
Apamea vultuosa (Grote, 1875) – airy apamea
Apamea walshi Lafontaine, 2009
Apamea wasedana Sugi, 1982
Apamea wikeri Quinter & Lafontaine, 2009
Apamea xylodes Mikkola & Lafontaine, 2009
Apamea zeta (Treitschke, 1825)

أنواع سابقة
Apamea formosensis is now Leucapamea formosensis (Hampson, 1910)
Apamea mixta is now Melanapamea mixta (Grote, 1881)


== المراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 103
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apamea
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Apamea est un genre de lépidoptères (papillons) nocturnes de la famille des Noctuidae.

Principales espèces à continuer
Apamea crenata
Apamea epomidion
Apamea lateritia
Apamea lithoxylaea — la Doucette
Apamea maillardi
Apamea monoglypha — la Monoglyphe ou Noctuelle radicée
Apamea ophiogramma
Apamea remissa
Apamea scolopacina
Apamea sordens — la Noctuelle basilaire
Apamea sublustris
Apamea unanimis — la Noctuelle de l'alpiste
Apamea zeta

Liens externes
(en) Fauna Europaea : Apamea Ochsenheimer, 1816 (consulté le 21 février 2023)
(en) BioLib : Apamea Ochsenheimer, 1816
(en) Catalogue of Life : Apamea Ochsenheimer, 1816 (consulté le 21 février 2023)
(fr + en) ITIS : Apamea
 Portail de l’entomologie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 537
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Apamea
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Apamea is a former city and lesser known set of ruins located north of Hama, Syria.

## Get in
Apamea is easily accessible via hired driver from the nearby city of Hama. Local hotels in Hama are able to provide hired drivers to take you to the area on a day trip which can include other nearby sites.

## Get around
The bus services from Hama will normally deposit you in town, a few hundred metres from the site. It is a short walk up the hill, or you may be offered a ride on a 125cc motorcycle by a who may or may not expect (or demand) money for the service, which should only be a few coins.
Getting around the site is easy, though it is large (several miles in either direction) it is a fairly easy walk. There is no formal disabled access, and much of the site is ruins. Wheelchair access might be possible (the paving in the colonnade is still mostly intact), but you'd be trying your luck.
Several Syrian tour companies offer guided tours of the site, which usually include a meal at the restaurant.

## See
The ruins of Apamea (or Persian Afemea) are small enough to handle on foot. Because of its high elevation, the area is frequently foggy and wet leaving a unique haze in the area. Lichens and moss cover much of the surrounding landscape. While Apamea is considered a lesser known attraction in Syria, many locals describe the area as more impressive than its famous counterpart to the east, Palmyra. Surrounding the Apamea ruins are the dead city sites of Serjilla and Al Bara.
There are several sets of ruins at the site, with more excavations still being undertaken in 2008. The colonnade on the main street of Apamea is a mile long and, in true Roman style, is dead straight, providing interesting 'vanishing point' photography. There is also a citadel at the site, which has seen locals move in and build around it, and several, smaller ruins heading away from town on the access road.
Access to all of these parts of the site are paid for with one single ticket, worth only a few American dollars. You are then permitted to walk around most of the vast site by yourself. Several tourist guidebooks are available in several European languages.
In the old caravanserai in the town is a museum with some nice mosaics from Apamea.

## Do
Take photos, walk, avoid the rubbish dumped at the site by locals and fend off the local touts (nowhere near as bad as at Palmyra, though). The town, only a few hundred metres away, has high unemployment and little to offer most tourists,

## Buy
Fake coins from the local touts on motorbikes. The coins make a great souvenir and help provide a little income to local families.

## Eat
There is a restaurant at the site that serves basic renditions of Western food.

## Drink
Bring your own and bring plenty, especially in summer.

## Sleep
There's not really anywhere to sleep near here. Come on a day trip from Hama or Homs.
Maybe you could bring a tent or swag to camp nearby?



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
EBLA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:29:54


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 6,409
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ebla
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ebla (Sumerian: 𒌈𒆷 eb₂-la, Arabic: إبلا, modern: تل مرديخ, Tell Mardikh) was one of the earliest kingdoms in Syria. Its remains constitute a tell located about 55 km (34 mi) southwest of Aleppo near the village of Mardikh. Ebla was an important center throughout the 3rd millennium BC and in the first half of the 2nd millennium BC. Its discovery proved the Levant was a center of ancient, centralized civilization equal to Egypt and Mesopotamia and ruled out the view that the latter two were the only important centers in the Near East during the Early Bronze Age.

Starting as a small settlement in the Early Bronze Age (c. 3500 BC), Ebla developed into a trading empire and later into an expansionist power that imposed its hegemony over much of northern and eastern Syria. Ebla was destroyed during the 23rd century BC. It was then rebuilt and was mentioned in the records of the Third Dynasty of Ur. The second Ebla was a continuation of the first, ruled by a new royal dynasty. It was destroyed at the end of the 3rd millennium BC, which paved the way for the Amorite tribes to settle in the city, forming the third Ebla. The third kingdom also flourished as a trade center; it became a subject and an ally of Yamhad (modern-day Aleppo) until its final destruction by the Hittite king Mursili I in c. 1600 BC.
Ebla maintained its prosperity through a vast trading network. Artifacts from Sumer, Cyprus, Egypt and as far as Afghanistan were recovered from the city's palaces. The kingdom had its own language, Eblaite, and the political organization of Ebla had features different from the Sumerian model. Women enjoyed a special status, and the queen had major influence in the state and religious affairs. The pantheon of gods was mainly north Semitic and included deities exclusive to Ebla. The city was excavated from 1964 and became famous for the Ebla tablets, an archive of about 20,000 cuneiform tablets found there, dated to 2500 BC–2350 BC. Written in both Sumerian and Eblaite and using the cuneiform, the archive has allowed a better understanding of the Sumerian language and provided important information over the political organization and social customs of the mid-3rd millennium BC's Levant.

Etymology
The word "Ebla" may derive from a word meaning "white rock", possibly referring to the limestone outcrop on which the city was built.

History
Chalcolithic
Artifacts from the late Ubaid and late Chalcolithic periods were recovered from the central mound.

Early Bronze
Ebla was first settled around 3500 BC; its growth was supported by many satellite agricultural settlements. The city benefited from its role as an entrepôt of growing international trade, which probably began with an increased demand for wool in Sumer. Archaeologists designate this early habitation period "Mardikh I"; it ended around 3000 BC.
Mardikh I is followed by the first and second kingdoms era between about 3000 and 2000 BC, designated "Mardikh II". I. J. Gelb considered Ebla a part of the Kish civilization, which was a cultural entity of East Semitic-speaking populations that stretched from the center of Mesopotamia to the western Levant.

First kingdom
Ebla was the most prominent kingdom among the Syrian states during the first kingdom period between about 3000 and 2300 BC, particularly during the second half of the 3rd millennium BC, known as "the age of the archives" after the Ebla tablets.
Mardiikh IIA: The early period between 3000 and 2400 BC is designated "Mardikh IIA". General knowledge about the city's history prior to the written archives is obtained through excavations. The first stages of Mardikh IIA is identified with building "CC", and structures that form a part of building "G2", which was apparently a royal palace built c. 2700 BC. Toward the end of this period, a hundred years' war with Mari started. Mari gained the upper hand through the actions of its king Saʿumu, who conquered many of Ebla's cities. In the mid-25th century BC, king Kun-Damu defeated Mari, but the state's power declined following his reign.

Mardikh IIB1: The archive period, which is designated "Mardikh IIB1", lasted from c. 2400 BC until c. 2300 BC. The end of the period is known as the "first destruction", mainly referring to the destruction of the royal palace (called palace "G" and built over the earlier "G2"), and much of the acropolis. During the archive period, Ebla had political and military dominance over the other Syrian city-states of northern and eastern Syria, which are mentioned in the archives. Most of the tablets, which date from that period, are about economic matters but also include royal letters and diplomatic documents.

The written archives do not date from before Igrish-Halam's reign, which saw Ebla paying tribute to Mari, and an extensive invasion of Eblaite cities in the middle Euphrates region led by the Mariote king Iblul-Il. Ebla recovered under King Irkab-Damu in about 2340 BC; becoming prosperous and launching a successful counter-offensive against Mari. Irkab-Damu concluded a peace and trading treaty with Abarsal. This Treaty between Ebla and Abarsal is one of the earliest-recorded treaties in history.

Geography
At its greatest extent, Ebla controlled an area roughly half the size of modern Syria, from Ursa'um in the north, to the area around Damascus in the south, and from Phoenicia and the coastal mountains in the west, to Haddu in the east. Large parts of the kingdom were under the direct control of the king and were administered by governors; the rest consisted of vassal kingdoms. One of the most important of these vassals was Armi, which is the city most often mentioned in the Ebla tablets. Ebla had more than sixty vassal kingdoms and city-states, including Hazuwan, Burman, Emar, Halabitu and Salbatu.
According to Archi, these are "the twelve Syrian cities long allied with Ebla that (presumably) assisted in some way during the expedition against Mari: NIrar, Ra’ak, Burman, Dub, Emar, Garmu, Lumnan, Ibubu, Ursaum, Utik, Kakmium, and Iritum (Irridu)." Furthermore, the following cities were under Ebla's hegemony at that time, and annually delivered tribute: Dub, Dulu, Harran, Ibubu, Iritum, Kablul, Sanapzugum, Ursaum, and Utik.
Modern scholars have termed the king's chief official  "the vizier". The most powerful vizier was Ibrium, who campaigned against Abarsal during the term of his predecessor Arrukum. Ibrium held office for 18 years with warfare occurring in all but one year. During the reign of Isar-Damu, Ebla continued the war against Mari, which defeated Ebla's ally Nagar, blocking trade routes between Ebla and southern Mesopotamia via upper Mesopotamia. Ebla conducted regular military campaigns against rebellious vassals, including several attacks on Armi, and a campaign against the southern region of Ib'al – close to Qatna. In order to settle the war with Mari, Isar-Damu allied with Nagar and Kish. Some scholars have suggested that the Kish in question was not the Mesopotamian city but rather a town near Nagar in the Khabur area. The campaign was headed by the Eblaite vizier Ibbi-Sipish, who led the combined armies to victory in a battle near Terqa. The alliance also attacked Armi and occupied it, leaving Ibbi-Sipish's son Enzi-Malik as governor. Ebla suffered its first destruction a few years after the campaign, probably following Isar-Damu's death.

First destruction of Ebla
The first destruction occurred c. 2300 BC; palace "G" was burned, baking the clay tablets of the royal archives and preserving them. Many theories about the cause and the perpetrator have been posited:

High (early) dating hypothesis: Giovanni Pettinato supports an early dating for Ebla that would put the destruction at around 2500 BC. Pettinato, while preferring the date of 2500 BC, later accepted the event could have happened in 2400 BC. The scholar suggests the city was destroyed in 2400 BC by a Mesopotamian such as Eannatum of Lagash – who boasted of taking tribute from Mari – or Lugalzagesi of Umma, who claimed to have reached the Mediterranean.
Akkadian hypothesis: Both kings Sargon of Akkad and his grandson Naram-Sin claimed to have destroyed a town called Ibla, The discoverer of Ebla, Paolo Matthiae, considers Sargon a more likely culprit; his view is supported by Trevor Bryce, but rejected by Michael Astour. The conquest of Armanum and Ebla on the Mediterranean coast by Naram-Sin is mentioned in several of his inscriptions:
"Whereas, for all time since the creation of mankind, no king whosoever had destroyed Armanum and Ebla, the god Nergal, by means of (his) weapons opened the way for Naram-Sin, the mighty, and gave him Armanum and Ebla. Further, he gave to him the Amanus, the Cedar Mountain, and the Upper Sea. By means of the weapons of the god Dagan, who magnifies his kingship, Naram-Sin, the mighty, conquered Armanum and Ebla."
Mari's revenge: According to Alfonso Archi and Maria Biga, the destruction happened approximately three or four years after the battle at Terqa. Archi and Biga say the destruction was caused by Mari in retaliation for its humiliating defeat at Terqa. This view is supported by Mario Liverani. Archi says the Mariote king Isqi-Mari destroyed Ebla before ascending the throne of his city.
Natural catastrophe: Astour says a natural catastrophe caused the blaze which ended the archive period. He says the destruction was limited to the area of the royal palace and there is no convincing evidence of looting. He dates the fire to c. 2290 BC (Middle Chronology).

Second kingdom
The second kingdom's period is designated "Mardikh IIB2", and spans the period between 2300 and 2000 BC. The second kingdom lasted until Ebla's second destruction, which occurred anytime between 2050 and 1950 BC, with the 2000 BC dating being a mere formal date. The Akkadians under Sargon of Akkad and his descendant Naram-Sin invaded the northern borders of Ebla aiming for the forests of the Amanus Mountain; the intrusions were separated by roughly 90 years and the areas attacked were not attached to Akkad. Archi accept that the Ibla mentioned in the annals of Sargon and Naram-Sin is the Syrian Ebla but do not consider them responsible for the destruction which ended the Archive period. By the time of Naram-Sin, Armi was the hegemonic city in northern Syria and was destroyed by the Akkadian king.

A new local dynasty ruled the second kingdom of Ebla, but there was continuity with its first kingdom heritage. Ebla maintained its earliest features, including its architectural style and the sanctity of the first kingdom's religious sites. A new royal palace was built in the lower town, and the transition from the archive period is marked only by the destruction of palace "G". Little is known about the second kingdom because no written material have been discovered aside from one inscription dating to the end of the period.
The second kingdom was attested in contemporaneous sources; in an inscription, Gudea of Lagash asked for cedars to be brought from Urshu in the mountains of Ebla, indicating Ebla's territory included Urshu north of Carchemish in modern-day Turkey. Texts that dates to the seventh year of Amar-Sin (c. 2040 BC), a ruler of the Ur III empire, mention a messenger of the Ensí ("Megum") of Ebla. The second kingdom was considered a vassal by the Ur III government, but the nature of the relation is unknown and it included the payment of tribute. A formal recognition of Ur's overlordship appears to be a condition for the right of trade with that empire.
The second kingdom disintegrated toward the end of the 21st century BC, and ended with the destruction of the city by fire, although evidence for the event has only been found outside of the so-called "Temple of the Rock", and in the area around palace "E" on the acropolis. Conflict may have preceded the fire; according to Astour, it could have been the result of a Hurrian invasion c. 2030 BC, led by the former Eblaite vassal city of Ikinkalis. The destruction of Ebla is mentioned in the fragmentary Hurro-Hittite legendary epic "Song of Release" discovered in 1983, which Astour considers as describing the destruction of the second kingdom. In the epic, an Eblaite assembly led by a man called "Zazalla" prevents king Meki from showing mercy to prisoners from Ebla's former vassal Ikinkalis, provoking the wrath of the Hurrian storm god Teshub and causing him to destroy the city.

Middle Bronze
Third kingdom
The third kingdom is designated "Mardikh III"; it is divided into periods "A" (c. 2000–1800 BC) and "B" (c. 1800–1600 BC). In period "A", Ebla was quickly rebuilt as a planned city. The foundations covered the remains of Mardikh II; new palaces and temples were built, and new fortifications were built in two circles – one for the low city and one for the acropolis. The city was laid out on regular lines and large public buildings were built. Further construction took place in period "B".

The first known king of the third kingdom is Ibbit-Lim, who described himself as the Mekim of Ebla. A basalt votive statue bearing Ibbit-Lim's inscription was discovered in 1968; this helped to identify the site of Tell-Mardikh with the ancient kingdom Ebla. The name of the king is Amorite in the view of Pettinato; it is therefore probable the inhabitants of third kingdom Ebla were predominantly Amorites, as were most of the inhabitants of Syria at that time.
By the beginning of the 18th century BC, Ebla had become a vassal of Yamhad, an Amorite kingdom centered in Aleppo. Written records are not available for this period, but the city was still a vassal during Yarim-Lim III of Yamhad's reign. One of the known rulers of Ebla during this period was Immeya, who received gifts from the Egyptian Pharaoh Hotepibre, indicating the continuing wide connections and importance of Ebla. The city was mentioned in tablets from the Yamhadite vassal city of Alalakh in modern-day Turkey; an Eblaite princess married a son of King Ammitaqum of Alalakh, who belonged to a branch of the royal Yamhadite dynasty.
Ebla was destroyed by the Hittite King Mursili I in about 1600 BC. Indilimma was probably the last king of Ebla; a seal of his crown prince Maratewari was discovered in the western palace "Q". Alternatively, Maratewari  could well be the last king according to Archi, who also argued that the "Song of Release" epic describes the destruction of the third kingdom and preserves older elements.

Later periods
Ebla never recovered from its third destruction. It was a small village in the phase designated "Mardikh IV" (1600–1200 BC), and was mentioned in the records of Alalakh as a vassal to the Idrimi dynasty. "Mardikh V" (1200–535 BC) was a rural, Early Iron Age settlement that grew in size during later periods. Further development occurred during "Mardikh VI", which lasted until c. 60 AD. "Mardikh VII" began in the 3rd century AD and lasted until the 7th century, after which the site was abandoned.

Site
Layout
Ebla consisted of a lower town and a raised acropolis in the center. During the first kingdom, the city had an area of 56 hectares and was protected by mud-brick fortifications. Ebla was divided into four districts – each with its own gate in the outer wall. The acropolis included the king's palace "G", and one of two temples in city dedicated to Kura (called the "Red Temple"). The lower city included the second temple of Kura in the southeast called "Temple of the Rock". During the second kingdom, a royal palace (Archaic palace "P5") was built in the lower town northwest of the acropolis, in addition to temple "D" built over the destroyed "Red Temple".

During the third kingdom, Ebla was a large city nearly 60 hectares in size, and was protected by a fortified rampart, with double chambered gates. The acropolis was fortified and separated from the lower town. New royal palace "E" was built on the acropolis (during Mardikh IIIB), and a temple of Ishtar was constructed over the former "Red" and "D" temples (in area "D"). The lower town was also divided into four districts; palace "P5" was used during Mardikh IIIA, and replaced during Mardikh IIIB by the "Intermediate Palace".
Other third kingdom buildings included the vizier palace, the western palace (in area "Q"), the temple of Shamash (temple "N"), the temple of Rasap (temple "B1") and the northern palace (built over the "Intermediate Palace"). In the north of the lower town, a second temple for Ishtar was built, while the former "Temple of the Rock" was replaced by a temple of Hadad.

Royal burials
The kings of the first kingdom were buried outside the city; the last ten kings (ending with Irkab-Damu) were buried in Darib, while older kings were buried in a royal mausoleum located in Binas and only one royal tomb dating to the first kingdom was discovered in Ebla (Hypogeum "G4"). This first kingdom tomb was probably built during the reign of the last king and might be an indication of Eblaite adoption of Mesopotamian traditions to bury the kings beneath their royal palaces.
The third kingdom royal necropolis was discovered beneath palace "Q" (the western palace); it contains many hypogea but only three were excavated. Those tombs were natural caves in the bedrock of the palace's foundation; they all date to the 19th and 18th centuries BC and had a similar plan consisting of an entrance shaft, burial chambers and a dromos, or entryway, connecting the shaft to the chamber.

Hypogeum G4
The tomb found in the royal palace "G" is designated hypogeum "G4"; it dates to the archive period, most probably the reign of Isar-Damu. The tomb is heavily damaged; most of its stones were sacked and nothing of the roof system remains. It also lacks any skeletal remains or funerary goods suggesting that it was either heavily pillaged, never used, or was built as a cenotaph.
Excavated between 1992 and 1995, it is located underneath the western sector of the palace at a depth of almost 6 meters. The tomb is composed of two rooms opened on each other's with lime plaster floors. Both rooms are rectangular in shape; the eastern room (L.6402) is 4 meters wide, more than 3,5 meters long (total length is unknown due to heavy damage) and west–east oriented. The western room (L.5762) is 5.20 meters long, 4 meters wide and west–east oriented. Limestone was used to build the walls and few blocks protruding from the sides toward the middle of the rooms suggest the roof to have been a corbelled vault.

Western palace tombs
The tombs were found under the floor of Building Q, which was built in the Isin-Larsa period.

The tomb of the princess: dating to c. 1800 BC, it is the oldest and smallest of the third kingdom tombs found. Excavated in 1978, it contained the remains of a young woman.. The dromos is an enlargement of a natural cave with steps partially cut in the bedrock and partially paved with stones. The tomb is the only one not pillaged; it contained precious jewels and funerary objects.
The tomb of the cisterns: this tomb is the most damaged in the necropolis. It consists of a double room burial; the earliest, (Q79A), was built at the same period of the tomb of the princess, and was badly damaged when the tomb was reused, and a dromos was built in the place of Q79A toward the end of the 17th century BC (leading to the founding of burial Q79B). This was probably the resting place of a king; a club (a symbol of royal power) was discovered in Q79A.
The tomb of the lord of the goats: the largest in the necropolis, it includes two depositional chambers and is reached through a vertical shaft. The recovered body is not identified; archaeologists call it "the Lord of the Goats" after one of the grave goods, a throne decorated with bronze goat heads. It could be king Immeya; a silver cup inscribed with his name was among the grave goods.

Government
The first kingdom's government consisted of the king (styled Malikum) and the grand vizier, who headed a council of elders (Abbu) and the administration. The second kingdom was also a monarchy, but little is known about it because of a lack of written records. The third kingdom was a city-state monarchy with reduced importance under the authority of Yamhad.

Administration of the first kingdom
The queen shared the running of affairs of state with the king. The crown prince was involved in internal matters and the second prince was involved in foreign affairs. Most duties, including military ones, were handled by the vizier and the administration, which consisted of 13 court dignitaries – each of whom controlled between 400 and 800 men forming a bureaucracy with 11,700 people. Each of the four quarters of the lower city was governed by a chief inspector and many deputies. To oversee royal interest, the king employed agents (mashkim), collectors (ur) and messengers (kas).

Administrative divisions
Many client kingdoms owed allegiance to Ebla and each was ruled by its own king (En); those vassal kings were highly autonomous, paying tribute and supplying military assistance to Ebla. The administrative center in the capital was named the "SA.ZA"; it included the royal palaces, storerooms and some temples. Regions beyond the walls of the capital were collectively named in Eblaite texts "uru-bar" (literally meaning outside of the city). The villages and towns under the central authority were either ruled directly from the capital, or had appointed officials. The titles of the civil servants do not clearly define the bearer's responsibilities and authority as each town had its own political traditions.

Lugal: while in Mesopotamia a lugal designated a king, in Ebla it designated a governor who was directly under the authority of the capital. The nature of this title as part of Eblaite bureaucracy is ambiguous; each lugal was under the authority of the grand vizier, and the bearers ruled cities directly under the authority of the capital and they all brought goods to be kept in Ebla's storehouses. Pettinato counted 14 different lugals in the Eblaite administrative texts and deduced that the kingdom was divided into fourteen departments; two of them in the capital itself and the remaining twelve spanned the rest of the kingdom.
Ugula: the title is translated as superintendent; some ugulas were independent rulers and some represented the highest authority of a tribal group. Many cities had an appointed ugula as their head of administration such as the city of Darum.

Chora
The regions under the direct control of the king that were economically vital for the capital are called the "chora" by archaeologists. Regions under direct control of the king extended beyond the chora and it is difficult to determine the exact size of the kingdom and the chora due to the constant military expansion of Ebla which added new territories; some of those were ruled directly while others were allowed to retain their own rulers as vassals.
Generally, the chora is the core region of Ebla that includes the economic hinterland supporting the capital. It includes the cities and villages where the king or his vizier had palaces, towns that included important sanctuaries of gods related to the royal institution, towns visited by the monarch during the different rituals he participated in (such as the renewal of royalty ritual), and other cities such as the ones where textiles were delivered. The chora spans around 3000 km2; from west to east it includes the plains east of Jabal Zawiya, the Maṭkh swamp, al-Hass mountain and mount Shabīth. Areas directly on the borders of the chora such as al-Ghab, al-Rouge plain and al-Jabbul have close cultural affinity with the chora.

People, language, and culture
The first and second kingdoms
Mardikh II's periods shared the same culture. the population of Ebla during Mardikh IIB1 (2400–2300 BC) is estimated to have numbered around 40,000 in the capital, and over 200,000 people in the entire kingdom. The Eblaites of Mardikh II were Semite-speakers close to their Northwestern Semitic neighbors, such as the Amorites. Giovanni Pettinato said the Eblaite language, one of the oldest attested Semitic languages, was a West Semitic language; Gelb and others said it was an East Semitic dialect closer to the Akkadian language. Academic consensus considers Eblaite an East Semitic language which exhibits both West and East Semitic features.
Ebla held several religious and social festivals, including rituals for the succession of a new king, which normally lasted for several weeks. The Eblaite calendars were based on a solar year divided into twelve months. Two calendars were discovered; the "old calendar" used during the reign of Igrish-Halam, and a "new calendar" introduced by vizier Ibbi-Sipish. Many months were named in honor of deities; in the new calendar, "Itu be-li" was the first month of the year, and meant "the month of the lord". Each year was given a name instead of a number.
Women received salaries equal to those of men and could accede to important positions and head government agencies. The Eblaites imported Kungas from Nagar, and used them to draw the carriages of royalty and high officials, as well as diplomatic gifts for allied cities. Society was less centered around the palace and the temple than in Mesopotamian kingdoms. The Eblaite palace was designed around the courtyard, which was open toward the city, thus making the administration approachable. This contrasts with Mesopotamian palaces, which resembled citadels with narrow entrances and limited access to the external courtyard. Music played an important part in the society and musicians were both locals, or hired from other cities such as Mari. Ebla also hired acrobats from Nagar, but later reduced their number and kept some to train local Eblaite acrobats.

The third kingdom
The Mardikh III population was predominately Semitic Amorite. The Amorites were mentioned in the first kingdom's tablets as neighbors and as rural subjects, and they came to dominate Ebla after the destruction of the second kingdom. The city witnessed a great increase in construction, and many palaces, temples and fortifications were built. The Amorite-speaking Eblaites worshiped many of the same deities as the Paleo-Syrian-speaking Eblaites of earlier periods, and maintained the sanctity of the acropolis in the center of the city. The third kingdom's iconography and royal ideology were under the influence of Yamhad's culture; kingship was received from the Yamhadite deities instead of Ishtar of Ebla, which is evident by the Eblaite seals of Indilimma's period.

Genetics
Ancient DNA analysis on 10 human remains dating to the Early and Middle Bronze Age from Ebla found that Eblaites were a mixture of Copper age Levantines and Mesopotamians, and were genetically similar to contemporaneous Levantines.
One Early Bronze Age (2700-2500 BC) individual carried haplogroup E1b1b1b2a-M123, a lineage likely linked to the diffusion of Afroasiatic languages. Another Early Bronze Age (2572-2470 cal BCE) individual belonged to J1a2a1a2-P58, while four Middle Bronze Age (2000-1800 BC) individuals carried haplogroups J1a2a1a2-P58 (x2), G2a and the West Asian  T1a1-L162 which was present since the middle Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) Levant.

Economy
During the first kingdom period, the palace controlled the economy, but wealthy families managed their financial affairs without government intervention. The economic system was redistributive; the palace distributed food to its permanent and seasonal workers. It is estimated that around 40,000 persons contributed to this system, but in general, and unlike in Mesopotamia, land stayed in the hands of villages, which paid an annual share to the palace. Agriculture was mainly pastoral; large herds of cattle were managed by the palace. The city's inhabitants owned around 140,000 head of sheep and goats, and 9,000 cattle.
Ebla derived its prosperity from trade; its wealth was equal to that of the most important Sumerian cities, and its main commercial rival was Mari. Ebla's main articles of trade were probably timber from the nearby mountains, and textiles. Handicrafts also appear to have been a major export, evidenced by the quantity of artifacts recovered from the palaces of the city. Ebla possessed a wide commercial network reaching as far as modern-day Afghanistan. It shipped textiles to Cyprus, possibly through the port of Ugarit, but most of its trade seems to have been directed by river-boat towards Mesopotamia – chiefly Kish. The main palace G was found to contain artifacts dating from Ancient Egypt bearing the names of the pharaohs Khafre and Pepi I.
Ebla continued to be a center of trade during the second kingdom, evidenced by the surrounding cities that appeared during its period and were destroyed along with the city. Trade continued to be Ebla's main economic activity during the third kingdom; archaeological finds show there was an extensive exchange with Egypt and coastal Syrian cities such as Byblos.

Religion
Ebla was a polytheistic state. During the first kingdom, Eblaites worshiped their dead kings. The pantheon of the first Ebla included pairs of deities which are classified into three types: couples (the most common type) such as a male deity and his female consort; divine twosomes such as the deities that cooperate to create the cosmos in the Egyptian and Mesopotamian pantheons;and "divine pairs" who were actually a single deity with two names. Eblaites worshiped few Mesopotamian deities, preferring North-Western Semitic gods, some of which were unique to Ebla. The first pair-type, couples, included Hadabal (dNI-da-KUL), who was exclusive to Ebla, and his consort, Belatu ("his wife"); Rasap and his consort Adamma; the patron gods of the city Kura, who was unique to Ebla, and his consort Barama. Among the divine pairs were artisan god Kamish/Tit, Kothar-wa-Khasis and the planet Venus represented by twin mountain gods; Shahar as the morning star and Shalim as the evening star.
The first Eblaites worshiped many other deities, such as the Syrian goddess Ishara, who was the goddess of the royal family. Ishtar was also worshiped but was mentioned only five times in one of the monthly offering lists, while Ishara was far more important, appearing 40 times. Other deities included Damu; the Mesopotamian god Utu; Ashtapi; Dagan; Hadad (Hadda) and his consort Halabatu ("she of Halab"); and Shipish, the goddess of the sun who had a temple dedicated to her cult. The four city gates were named after the gods Dagan, Hadda, Rasap and Utu, but it is unknown which gate had which name. Overall, the offering list mentioned about 40 deities receiving sacrifices.
During the third kingdom, Amorites worshiped common northern Semitic gods; the unique Eblaite deities disappeared. Hadad was the most important god, while Ishtar took Ishara's place and became the city's most important deity apart from Hadad.

Biblical connection theories
At the beginning of the process of deciphering the tablets, Giovanni Pettinato made claims about possible connections between Ebla and the Bible, citing alleged references in the tablets to the existence of Yahweh, the Patriarchs, Sodom and Gomorrah and other Biblical references. However, much of the initial media excitement about a supposed Eblaite connections with the Bible, based on preliminary guesses and speculations by Pettinato and others, is now widely discredited and the academic consensus is that Ebla "has no bearing on the Minor Prophets, the historical accuracy of the Biblical Patriarchs, Yahweh worship, or Sodom and Gomorrah". In Ebla studies, the focus has shifted away from comparisons with the Bible; Ebla is now studied as a civilization in its own right. The claims led to a bitter personal and academic conflict between the scholars involved, as well as what some described as political interference by the Syrian authorities.

Excavations
In 1964, Italian archaeologists from the University of Rome La Sapienza under the direction of Paolo Matthiae began excavating at Tell Mardikh. In 1968, they recovered a statue dedicated to the goddess Ishtar bearing the name of Ibbit-Lim, mentioning him as king of Ebla. That identified the city, long known from Lagashite and Akkadian inscriptions. In the next decade, the team discovered a palace (palace G) dating from c. 2500–2000 BC. Finds in the palaces include a small sculpture made out of precious materials, Lapis lazuli, black stones and gold.
Thirteen full and fragmentary lenticular cuneiform tablets were found in the palace throne room, thought to have been there versus the archive because of the city's fall. In a storeroom off the throne room, the nearly complete standard of the queen and fragments believed to come from the standard of the king were found. Other artifacts included wood furniture inlaid with mother-of-pearl and composite statues created from colored stones. A silver bowl bearing king Immeya's name was recovered from the "Tomb of the Lord of the Goats", together with Egyptian jewels and an Egyptian ceremonial mace presented by pharaoh Hotepibre.
About 17,000 cuneiform tablet fragments were discovered; when put together, they constitute 2,500 complete tablets, making the archive of Ebla one of the biggest from the 3rd millennium BC. About 80% of the tablets are written using the usual Sumerian combination of logograms and phonetic signs, while the others exhibited an innovative, purely phonetic representation using Sumerian cuneiform of a previously unknown Semitic language, which was called "Eblaite". Bilingual Sumerian/Eblaite vocabulary lists were found among the tablets, allowing them to be translated. The tablets provide many important insights into the cultural, economic and political life in northern Mesopotamia around the middle of the 3rd millennium BC. They also provide insight into the everyday lives of the inhabitants, and contain information about state revenues, Sumerian-Eblaite dictionaries, diplomatic exchanges with foreign rulers, school texts, hymns and myths.

Library
The over 4000-year-old tablets constitute the oldest library ever found. At Ebla, "the archives or library constituted an orderly collection of records at least 500 years older than any other that had been found anywhere before." There is evidence of their arrangement and classification. The larger tablets had originally been stored on shelves, but had fallen onto the floor when the palace was destroyed. The locations of the fallen tablets allowed the excavators to reconstruct their original positions on the shelves. They found the tablets had originally been shelved according to subject.
These features were absent from earlier Sumerian excavations. Sophisticated techniques of arrangement of texts, coupled with their composition, evidence the great antiquity of archival and library practices, which may be far older than was assumed to be the case before the discovery of the Ebla library. A sizable portion of the tablets contain literary and lexicographic texts; evidence seems to suggest the collection also served – at least partially – as a true library rather than a collection of archives intended solely for use by the kings, their ministers, and their bureaucracy. The tablets show evidence of the early transcription of texts into foreign languages and scripts, classification and cataloging for easier retrieval, and arrangement by size, form and content. The Ebla tablets have thus provided scholars with new insights into the origin of library practices that were in use 4,500 years ago.
While the absolute chronology of the archive is not yet certain a relative chronology for the 50-year period has been established. Because Ebla did not use Mesopotamian style year names or year numbers and the name of rulers was rarely mentioned in the texts scholars used script changes, grammar changes, and most importantly a prosopography of the members of the court, especially the wives and daughters of the king. The most relevant tablets for this effort were a series of yearly metal accounts and monthly linen accounts.
Most of the recovered tablets and tablet fragments were stored at the Idlib Regional Museum in Syria. Their current condition is unknown.

Legacy
Ebla's first kingdom is an example of early Syrian centralized states, and is considered one of the earliest empires by scholars, such as Samuel Finer, and Karl Moore, who consider it the first-recorded world power. Ebla's discovery changed the former view of Syria's history as a bridge between Mesopotamia and Egypt; it proved the region was a center of civilization in its own right.

Syrian Civil War
As a result of the Syrian Civil War, excavations of Ebla stopped in March 2011. By 2013, it was under control of an opposition armed group called Arrows of the Right, who took advantage of its elevated location to use it as an observation point to watch for incoming government air attacks, as well as attempting to protect the site from looting. Many tunnels were dug and a crypt full of human remains was discovered; the remains were scattered and discarded by the robbers, who hoped to find jewelry and other precious artifacts. Besides excavations by rebels, nearby villagers also began digging at the site with the aim of finding and looting artifacts; some villagers removed carloads of soil suitable for making ceramic liners for bread-baking ovens from the tunnels.
The site was captured by the Syrian Armed Forces on 30 January 2020 during the 5th Northwestern Syria offensive, along with surrounding villages.

See also
Azi (scribe)
Biblical archaeology
Dugurasu
Cities of the Ancient Near East
List of kings of Ebla
Mari, Syria
Short chronology timeline

Notes
References
Bibliography
Further reading
Bonechi, Marco. "More on the Ebla gatekeepers", Revue d’Assyriologie et d’archéologie Orientale, vol. 106, pp. 33–36, 2012
Catagnoti, Amalia. "In the aftermath of the war. The truce between Ebla and Mari (ARET XVI 30) and the ransom of prisoners", Revue d’Assyriologie et d’archéologie Orientale, vol. 106, pp. 45–63, 2012
[1] Gori, Fiammetta, "Numeracy in early syro-mesopotamia. A study of accounting practices from Fāra to Ebla", University of Verona Dissertation, 2024
Maiocchi, Massimo. "Decorative Parts and Precious Artifacts at Ebla", Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 62, pp. 1–24, 2010
Marchetti, Nicolò; Nigro, Lorenzo (1997). "Cultic Activities in the Sacred Area of Ishtar at Ebla during the Old Syrian Period: The "Favissae" F.5327 and F.5238". Journal of Cuneiform Studies. 49. The American Schools of Oriental Research: 1–44. doi:10.2307/1359889. hdl:11573/109496. ISSN 0022-0256. JSTOR 1359889. S2CID 163416496.
Pinnock, Frances. "Ebla and Ur: Relations, Exchanges and Contacts between Two Great Capitals of the Ancient Near East.", Iraq, vol. 68, pp. 85–97, 2006
[2] Pinnock, Frances. "The Urban Landscape of Old Syrian Ebla." Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 53, pp. 13–33, 2001
Matthiae, Paolo (1976). "Ebla in the Late Early Syrian Period: The Royal Palace and the State Archives". The Biblical Archaeologist. 39 (3). The American Schools of Oriental Research: 94–113. doi:10.2307/3209400. ISSN 0006-0895. JSTOR 3209400. S2CID 165282182.

External links

Ebla (Tell Mardikh) Suggestion to have Ebla (Tell Mardikh) recognized as a UNESCO world heritage site
Ebla - Tell Mardikh with photos and plans of the digs (in Italian)
Two Weights from Temple N at Tell Mardikh-Ebla, by E. Ascalone and L. Peyronel (pdf)


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 9,246
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ebla
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ebla (arabe : إبلا ʾĪblā) (ou Tall Mardikh, arabe : تل مرديخ Tall Mardīḵ) est une ancienne ville de la Syrie des IIIe et IIe millénaires av. J.-C., dont les ruines se trouvent à l'emplacement du site archéologique de Tell Mardikh. Il se situe à 60 km au sud d'Alep sur la route de Hama, après la bifurcation en direction de Lattaquié. Il occupe une position stratégique, à la porte d'un col contrôlant l'accès à la mer Méditerranée.
Le site se présente sous la forme d'un tell ovale de 60 hectares dominé par une acropole centrale. Il a été découvert en 1964 et fouillé par les équipes du professeur Paolo Matthiae (de l'université La Sapienza de Rome) en 1968.
Ebla est une riche cité dès le IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. Ses rois commencent à partir de 2 500 av. J.-C. à étendre leur domination sur le Moyen Euphrate et sur une partie de la Syrie. Les fouilles ont permis de mettre au jour une salle d'archives, riche de plus de 17 000 tablettes et fragments de tablettes d'argile gravées en sumérien et en éblaïte, la langue locale. Ces textes ont fourni des informations précieuses sur l'économie, le commerce, l'industrie, l'administration et la diplomatie de ce puissant royaume. Des archives économiques, des traités d'alliance avec les États voisins, des relations de guerre et de paix, des épopées et des hymnes religieux montrent qu'Ebla fut l'une des plus puissantes cités-États de la Syrie entre 2500 et 2400 av. J.-C.
Il est possible de visiter les vestiges dégagés de palais, de temples et d'autres édifices. Alors que la documentation écrite concerne les XXVe et XXIVe siècles av. J.-C., les monuments, les objets et œuvres d'art dégagés datent essentiellement du début du IIe millénaire av. J.-C., la dernière période pendant laquelle Ebla florissait avant sa destruction finale.

Redécouverte, fouilles et dégradations
Le site de Tell Mardikh commence à être fouillé par une équipe archéologique italienne dirigée par Paolo Matthiae en 1964, dans le but de trouver des informations sur la Syrie intérieure du IIe millénaire. Après de premières campagnes qui n'ont fourni que des résultats modestes, une statue portant une inscription a été découverte en 1968 et a permis l'identification du site fouillé : il s'agit de l'antique ville d'Ebla, capitale d'un royaume déjà connu par plusieurs textes et dont on cherchait la localisation. 
Les fouilles du site connaissent surtout une grande notoriété en 1975, quand sont mis au jour plus de 14 000 tablettes et fragments de tablettes datant d'environ 2400 av. J.-C., période pour laquelle on n'imaginait pas qu'il existait en Syrie une administration utilisant l'écriture cunéiforme. La région était tenue pour être « en retard » par rapport à la Basse Mésopotamie. Une polémique éclata même, lorsque des journaux anglo-saxons prétendirent que ces archives révélaient des informations sur le temps des Patriarches de la Bible, et que le gouvernement syrien cherchait à occulter. La polémique retomba finalement une fois les tablettes publiées, et lorsqu'il fut prouvé qu'elles n'avaient que des rapports très lointains avec la Bible. 
Les fouilles mirent au jour peu d'espaces datant du IIIe millénaire et dégagèrent essentiellement des bâtiments du début du IIe millénaire. Elles se sont poursuivies chaque année sous la direction de Paolo Matthiae jusqu'à leur interruption par la guerre civile en 2011. Elles apportent des informations précieuses sur la culture de la Syrie intérieure du IIe millénaire. Il en est de même pour l'édition et surtout l'analyse des tablettes du IIIe millénaire, effectuées notamment par Alfonso Archi, Pelio Fronzaroli et Giovanni Pettinato.

Guerre civile syrienne
Depuis le début de la guerre civile syrienne en 2011, les fouilles du site ont été abandonnées. Le site a été investi par des groupes armés, et il a rapidement fait l'objet de fouilles clandestines, dans des nécropoles encore non explorées par les fouilles régulières. Des analyses d'images satellites du site datant de 2014 indiquent que les zones fouillées ont été profondément dégradées, si ce n'est détruites, avec des engins mécanisés, et que les fouilles clandestines se sont étendues sur une surface très large, où sont repérables de nombreuses fosses.

Le royaume d'Ebla durant la période « proto-syrienne » (c. 2500-2300 av. J.-C.)
Le premier niveau d'habitation du site (Mardikh I) correspond à la seconde moitié du IVe millénaire. Le second niveau (Mardikh II) couvre la majorité du IIIe millénaire. Il est divisé en plusieurs sous-périodes ; le niveau II A correspond au premier grand développement de la ville, entre 3000 et 2500 environ, qui marque le début de la période dite « proto-syrienne ». Le niveau II B couvre la seconde moitié du IIIe millénaire, soit l'Âge du bronze ancien, correspondant à la période des dynasties archaïques III, ainsi qu'aux périodes des empires d'Akkad et d'Ur III de Basse Mésopotamie. Cette seconde sous-période est avant tout connue grâce aux nombreuses tablettes documentant la vie du royaume vers les XXVe – XXIVe siècles (niveau Mardikh II B1), qui ont fait la renommée du site. Il s'agit de l'apogée d'Ebla en tant que puissance politique.

Le palais royal et les archives
Les archéologues ont fouillé peu de bâtiments datant de la période proto-syrienne. Le mieux connu est le « palais G », datant du XXIVe siècle, situé au centre de l'Acropole. Il s'agit du plus ancien palais connu en Syrie. Les structures identifiées sur ce tell pour la phase antérieure doivent correspondre à un premier état de cet édifice, contemporain de l'émergence de la royauté à Ebla : sur la pente sud, le bâtiment G2 avait sans doute une fonction de stockage ; au nord-est du secteur palatial, une construction comprenant une grande quantité de silex devait servir d'atelier de production et d'espace de stockage. Le palais de l'époque proto-syrienne devait s'étendre sur environ 10 000 m2 sur le secteur nord de la colline et disposer d'au moins un étage. Mais seuls quelques secteurs ont pu être dégagés, couvrant 2 500 m2. Quelques parties ont pu être identifiées. D'abord le « quartier administratif », au sud, au pied de l'acropole où se trouvait la chancellerie avec ses archives. S'y trouvait une petite cour intérieure, disposant d'un portique sur son côté sud. Une pièce disposée au sud de ce secteur était sans doute la salle du trône, autour de laquelle ont été récemment mis au jour de petites pièces, où ont été trouvés divers objets. On a également mis au jour une cuisine dans ce secteur. La « cour des audiences », située plus en hauteur, dominait la ville et était reliée au secteur précédent par une porte monumentale. Elle a pu servir de place publique assurant la communication entre l'espace public et le palais proprement dit. Ses façades étaient apparemment bordées de portiques à colonnes en bois, au moins sur deux côtés. Un podium placé sous le portique nord devait supporter le trône du roi lors des audiences. Sur le côté nord, la cour donnait accès à un bâtiment du palais. Sur le côté est, elle ouvrait sur l'accès principal au palais royal, par une porte monumentale ouvrant sur un escalier menant au sommet de l'acropole. Un complexe situé au sud a pu servir de résidence aux dignitaires du palais.

C'est dans le quartier administratif qu'ont été exhumées la plupart des tablettes des archives royales de cette période. La grande majorité des documents a été trouvée dans la « salle des archives ». Elle contenait environ 14 700 tablettes et fragments de tablettes, dont au moins 1 700 tablettes complètes et 9 500 avec des lacunes. Il s'agit d'une salle rectangulaire. Les tablettes étaient disposées par groupe de quinze, sur trois rangées d'étagères de bois (80 cm de profondeur et 50 cm de hauteur environ) alignées le long des murs nord et est. La face principale des tablettes était tournée vers l'extérieur, les plus grandes étant posées sur le sol. Elles étaient classées de façon thématique, et sont restées disposées ainsi après l'incendie qui a ravagé le palais lors de sa destruction, malgré la disparition des étagères. 
Sur le mur est se trouvaient les tablettes enregistrant les livraisons de tissus. Dans l'angle se trouvaient les tablettes relatives à des livraisons de métaux précieux et de cuivre. Le long du mur nord, l'étagère supérieure portait les listes lexicales sumériennes et des textes de chancellerie (décrets royaux, donations, traités). Les autres étagères portaient des comptes rendus relatifs à l'agriculture et à l'élevage, ainsi que des listes bilingues éblaïte/sumérien. 
Le vestibule de la salle des archives a livré d'autres tablettes. D'autres pièces du palais ont fourni des lots de tablettes conséquents : environ 900 dans le portique est de la cour des audiences (beaucoup de tablettes de livraisons alimentaires - farine et huile) et 500 dans un magasin de forme trapézoïdale du quartier administratif. En tout, plus de 17 000 tablettes et fragments ont été mis au jour, mettant en lumière les activités de l'administration du palais durant les trois derniers règnes précédant la destruction du site. 
La majorité des tablettes étaient rédigées en sumérien, langue d'un peuple vivant en Basse Mésopotamie, qui était alors la plus prestigieuse culturellement dans le Moyen-Orient, mais également dans une langue sémitique locale inconnue auparavant, et qui a finalement été baptisée « éblaïte ».

Institutions et administration du royaume
L'État éblaïte était dirigé par le résident principal du palais, le roi. Il portait le titre sumérien de EN, habituellement traduit par « seigneur » (porté également par le roi d'Uruk), qui correspond à l'éblaïte malkum/malikum. Trois règnes sont documentés par les archives du palais : ceux d'Igrish-Halam, d'Irkab-Damu et d'Isar-Damu, dont les durées de règnes sont encore mal connues. Une liste des rois précédents a pu être établie, notamment à partir de tablettes de listes de rois relatives au culte des ancêtres dynastiques. L'épouse principale du roi (la reine, maliktum) jouait un grand rôle, notamment religieux.
Un rituel royal qui correspondait au moins en partie à des noces royales est bien connu. Son interprétation est débattue, car il semble comprendre également l'intronisation du roi. Or celle-ci n'est pas mentionnée dans les tablettes le décrivant qui nous sont disponibles, mais dont l'association à la première cérémonie est évidente dans des documents administratifs. On comprend mal l'association entre le mariage et l'intronisation, qui ne semble pas due à des circonstances particulières. Quoi qu'il en soit, ce rituel durait au moins sept jours, durant lesquels le couple royal et les principaux dignitaires du royaume se rendaient en différents lieux : le temple du dieu Kura, patron du royaume, puis le mausolée dynastique, avant de revenir au palais pour effectuer d'autres rituels, présentant souvent un caractère agraire, avant que les noces ne soient conclues par un grand banquet précédant la consommation du mariage.

« Quand le dieu Soleil s’avance vers la porte de la chambre de Kura, la reine est assise à la gauche du roi. Le roi et la reine portent les vases d’huile quand les dieux et les souverains entrent dans leurs deux chambres. Le roi et la reine ne donnent pas les provisions quand les dieux et les souverains se tiennent dans leur chambre. Pendant qu'ils sont assis sur les trônes de leurs pères, le soir précédent les provisions ont été remises... tandis qu’ils restent dans le mausolée pour leurs rites de sept jours, quatre vêtements à la manière de Mari sont tissés pour Kura et Barama, pour le roi et pour la reine. (...) Personne ne mange les premiers-nés du troupeau du roi et de la reine. Puis la reine mange les premiers nés [du troupeau] du roi et alors leurs premiers-nés ils mangent aussi (...). Tandis que le roi fait dans le temple un sacriﬁce à la divinité de Shagish, une statue est érigée pour l’esprit protecteur du roi, une statue est érigée pour l’esprit protecteur de la reine, telle qu’elle a été composée et produite par les fabricants de statues. Le roi offre sur une coupe dans sa main un simulacre d’argent de la déesse Ishkhara en bois de buis avec la tête en argent et la ceinture en argent. Le roi sur une coupe dans sa main offre un simulacre de la Lionne en bois de buis avec la tête en argent et la ceinture en argent et la chaîne... et nous restons là pour deux cérémonies de sept jours et sept jours. Quand nous avons célébré pour ce jour leur cérémonie de sept jours, la tête de Kura est voilée et le roi et la reine sortent. Puis ils retournent au temple des dieux pour manger les cabris de l’offrande. »

— Extrait du rituel royal d'Ebla.
Dans les documents disponibles, le rôle du souverain est essentiellement religieux ; il incarnait le royaume, notamment dans les relations internationales où sa famille est intégrée dans les alliances interdynastiques (voir plus bas). Sa légitimité s'appuyait notamment sur le culte des ancêtres dynastiques divinisés, auxquels on offrait régulièrement des sacrifices. La cité de Darib semble avoir joué un rôle important dans ce culte funéraire, et les rois y étaient peut-être enterrés.
L'administration du royaume était dirigée par une dizaine de personnages appelés LUGAL, terme sumérien signifiant « grand homme ». Il désignait en Basse Mésopotamie des personnages de rang royal, mais dans le contexte éblaïte ce n'était pas le cas, et on le traduit par « seigneur » (qui devait être rendu en éblaïte par ba'lum). Ces dignitaires dirigeaient le personnel dépendant du palais. Ils apparaissent surtout dans les tablettes d'enregistrement des dons et contributions (mu-DU) qui sont dirigés vers les entrepôts royaux. Ils étaient une vingtaine au maximum, mais leur nombre a diminué et ils n'étaient plus que douze lors de la fin du royaume. À partir du règne d'Irkab-Damu, un de ces personnages, Arrukum, prend progressivement seul la direction de l'administration du royaume. Il devient alors une sorte de premier ministre, ou « vizir ». Le roi perd alors une grande partie de son rôle politique. Arrukum est ensuite remplacé par Ibrium peu avant la mort d'Irkab-Damu. Il reste à ce poste une quinzaine d'années, avant que son propre fils Ibbi-Zikir ne prenne sa place à sa mort, pour environ dix-sept ans. Ce vizir dirige lui-même les armées du royaume.
D'autres personnages importants dans l'administration éblaïte étaient les « Anciens » (ÁB.BA), sans doute une quarantaine de notables locaux. Par ailleurs, le palais administrait le territoire grâce à une cohorte de scribes qui tenaient la comptabilité et entretenaient ses archives. Un réseau de fonctionnaires était chargé de superviser les activités économiques du palais (appelés UGULA dans les textes). Les communautés ne dépendant pas directement de cet organisme devaient s'acquitter de redevances en nature (grain et huile notamment).
Finalement, même si la nature de la royauté éblaïte reste mal connue par bien de ses aspects, il est clair qu'il ne s'agissait pas d'un système autocratique dans lequel le souverain exerçait un pouvoir incontesté. Il devait composer avec plusieurs membres de l'oligarchie du royaume, en premier lieu le groupe des LUGAL dont une lignée finit par prendre une partie des fonctions monarchiques. Ebla était donc dominée par une élite ayant la main sur les affaires politiques et économiques.

Ebla dans les relations internationales
Malgré leur caractère essentiellement administratif, les archives du palais royal d'Ebla nous donnent des informations sur le contexte international de la période, grâce à la présence d'actes de chancellerie (des lettres diplomatiques et un traité de paix) et d'enregistrements des entrées et sorties de présents effectués dans le cadre des relations diplomatiques. Néanmoins, ces textes sont souvent peu explicites, et il est difficile de les situer dans l'ordre chronologique interne, en encore plus de trouver les correspondances avec les événements attestés par les sources provenant d'autres sites contemporains. De ce fait, de nombreuses incertitudes demeurent.
Les relations internationales d'Ebla sont essentiellement marquées par sa rivalité avec le plus puissant royaume situé dans son voisinage, Mari, localisé à sa frontière orientale et dominant la région du moyen Euphrate. À la fin du XXVe et au début du  XXIVe siècle, Ebla est un État vassal de Mari, et verse un tribut à son roi et à ses principaux dignitaires, comme le montrent les archives datant du règne d'Irkab-Damu.

« Ainsi (parle) Enna-Dagan, roi de Mari, au souverain d'Ebla : Anubu, le roi de Mari, a battu les villes d'Aburu et Ilgi dans le territoire de Belan ; dans la région montagneuse de Labanan il a laissé des montagnes de ruines. Sa'umu, le roi de Mari, a battu les villes de Tibalat et llwani : dans la région vallonnée d'Angai il a laissé des montagnes de ruines. Sa'umu, le roi de Mari, a battu le territoire des villes de Ra'aq, Nirum, Ashaldu et Baul près de Nakhal et a laissé des montagnes de ruines. Alors Istup-sar, roi de Mari, a battu les villes d'Emar et Lalanium et le territoire d'Ebla : à Emar et Lalanium il a laissé derrière lui des montagnes de ruines. Alors Iblul-il a battu les villes de Shadab et Addalini et Arisum dans le territoire de Birman, dans le pays de Sugurum et a laissé derrière lui des montagnes de ruines ; et ensuite les villes de Sharan et Dammium, Iblul-il, le roi de Mari, les a battues et a laissé des montagnes de ruines. Il est alors parti vers les villes de Nerat et Hazuwan, Iblul-il, le souverain de Mari, a reçu le tribut d'Ebla quand il était dans la ville de Mane et il a pillé Emar et a laissé des montagnes de ruines. Et ensuite les villes de Nakhal et Lubat et Shabab, du territoire de Gasur, il a battu et il a laissé sept montagnes de ruines, Iblul, le souverain de Mari. »

— Lettre d'Enna-Dagan, le nouveau roi de Mari, au souverain d'Ebla, vers 2380.
Mais Mari connaît ensuite une période d'affaiblissement, et le tribut est diminué. La puissance d'Ebla semble augmenter sous l'impulsion du vizir Ibrium : elle soumet notamment le royaume d'Emar, situé sur l'Euphrate, juste en face du royaume de Tuttul, vassal de Mari. C'est de cette période que daterait le traité passé entre Ebla et le royaume d'Abarsal (quelque part dans la région entre les zones d'influence d'Ebla et de Mari), qui est le plus ancien accord diplomatique dont on ait conservé la version écrite. Peu de temps après, Mari et Ebla concluent finalement une paix qui semble entériner un statut d'égalité entre les deux.
Le vizir Ibbi-zikir poursuit l'ascension politique d'Ebla, remportant plusieurs victoires contre des petits royaumes voisins qui affermissent son pouvoir. Cette situation aboutit à un conflit contre Mari, qui se termine par la victoire des Éblaïtes dirigés par leur vizir, à proximité de Tuttul. Pour assurer sa victoire face à un voisin qui reste puissant, Ebla cherche l'alliance de deux rivaux de Mari, les royaumes de Nagar (aujourd'hui Tell Brak, en Syrie du nord) et de Kish (au nord de la Basse Mésopotamie). Des mariages unissent des princesses éblaïtes à des princes des deux royaumes alliés. Finalement, une paix est conclue à nouveau avec Mari.
Ebla est alors à son apogée : son royaume s'étend sur une grande partie de la Syrie centrale et il dispose de nombreux vassaux. Le royaume dirigé par le vizir Ibbi-zikir semble faire jeu égal avec les autres grandes puissances régionales, Mari et Nagar (Tell Brak). À en juger par la présence d'objets égyptiens dans le palais royal, notamment un vase en albâtre portant le nom de Pépi Ier, il existe peut-être même des échanges diplomatiques entre Ebla et la vallée du Nil.

Activités économiques
Une économie palatiale
L'économie du royaume éblaïte était dominée par le palais royal, qui employait une majeure partie des travailleurs. Ceux-ci étaient rémunérés par l'administration palatiale en rations d'entretien, constituées de grain, d'huile et de laine. Les terres du palais étaient attribuées à des membres de la famille royale, ou bien de l'aristocratie, à qui les exploitants reversaient une partie du produit des cultures de façon à entretenir leur train de vie. Ces personnes disposaient des plus grands domaines. À côté, une foule de dépendants du palais disposait du même type de terres mais en quantité moindre. C'était l'administration centrale qui décidait en dernier lieu de l'attribution des terres, contrôlant ainsi ce système. Les temples ne disposaient pas de domaines, à la différence de ce qui se passait en Mésopotamie méridionale à la même période. Le culte était pris en charge par le palais.
La maison du roi, qui constituait le cœur de l'organisme palatial (SA.ZA dans les textes), entretenait des centaines de serviteurs (GURUŠ). Mais ils ne constituaient qu'une minorité des dépendants du palais. Ceux-ci étaient regroupés par unités familiales. Ils étaient répartis en groupes de 500 à 1 000 personnes ('iranum), dirigés par des surveillants (UGULA) et subdivisés en groupes de 20 travailleurs (É.DURU). Les artisans et marchands travaillant pour le palais résidaient plutôt dans la ville même, dans les faubourgs (URU.BAR) où se trouvaient également leurs espaces de travail. En tout, le personnel travaillant pour le palais au sens large comprenait environ 5 000 personnes. Si on estime qu'ils étaient généralement des chefs de familles composées en moyenne de 4 personnes, la population du royaume éblaïte était constituée d'au moins environ 20 000 personnes, si on s'en tient aux dépendants du palais.
À côté du palais, de ses administrateurs et de sa foule de dépendants, il existait des communautés rurales qui restaient plus ou moins indépendantes. Elles devaient cependant acquitter des impôts en nature au pouvoir central. Il existait peut-être un commerce privé, en dehors des circuits commerciaux contrôlés par le palais. Les activités qui se déroulaient en dehors de la sphère palatiale sont cependant très mal connues, car peu documentées.

Agriculture et élevage
Ebla était située au centre d'une plaine qui est toujours aujourd'hui très fertile, sous un climat méditerranéen, dans une zone qui dispose encore de plus de 200 millimètres de précipitations annuelles moyennes, et les bonnes années plus de 400 voire 500 millimètres. Cela permettait de pratiquer une agriculture sèche (non irriguée), mais de nature plutôt extensive, et non intensive comme l'était l'agriculture irriguée de Basse Mésopotamie, ce qui explique sans doute les différences dans les structures agraires entre les deux régions.
Une trentaine de tablettes listant des champs ont pu être analysées. Certaines sont de type « cadastral », enregistrant les possessions de divers membres de la cour, même s'il est impossible de connaître leur taille, car les valeurs des unités de mesure de surface éblaïtes sont inconnues. Les domaines les plus vastes étaient ceux de la famille royale, en priorité du roi, et du vizir, puis des membres de la haute administration. Ils comprenaient généralement des champs éparpillés sur plusieurs terroirs, et n'étaient donc pas d'un seul tenant. Parfois, les terres d'un village étaient attribuées à un seul et même personnage. Une centaine de ces villages sont connus par les textes, ce qui semble indiquer un habitat de type dispersé.
Concernent les types de cultures, les champs se divisaient en trois grandes catégories reprenant la « trilogie méditerranéenne ». Les champs céréaliers (GÁNA.KEŠDA) couvraient la plus grande partie du terroir. Environ les deux tiers des domaines étaient exclusivement céréaliers, le reste combinant différentes cultures. Un compte-rendu non datable montre qu'à une période le palais disposait de plus de 31 000 tonnes d'orge. Un quart à un tiers de la surface agricole serait couverte d'oliveraies (GIŠÌ.GIŠ). La vigne (GIŠGEŠTIN) était également cultivée. Les olives et le raisin étaient pressés dans les villages et les centres des domaines ruraux, comme l'attestent les mentions de pressoirs et de chais à vin dans certains documents. Il existait différentes qualités d'huile d'olive : une huile nouvelle, une huile amère, des huiles aromatisées (dont on se servait pour se parfumer), etc. On stockait ce produit dans des jarres : au moment de la fin du palais, ses réserves comptaient environ 4 000 jarres d'huile, 7 000 autres se trouvant dans les entrepôts des faubourgs. Selon les calculs effectués par A. Archi à partir de ces données, il a été évalué que les réserves totales du palais contenaient 330 000 litres d'huile, et en extrapolant à partir de cette donnée il a estimé qu'il aurait pu y avoir au moins 7 600 hectares d'oliveraies sur le territoire éblaïte.
L'élevage était également une activité économique importante dans l'économie d'Ebla, dans une région relativement sèche qui permettait un élevage pastoral de type extensif. Les moutons sont de loin le type de bétail le plus présent dans les sources administratives. Le dénombrement des moutons dépendant du palais montrent qu'il y en avait énormément : il y en aurait eu entre 70 000 et 80 000 puis plus de 100 000 lors des derniers temps des archives. En saison sèche, ils paissaient dans les finages villageois du royaume, mais en saison humide ils étaient envoyés dans les zones de steppes plus lointaines qui étaient alors suffisamment herbeuses pour les nourrir. Des pasteurs étaient chargés de surveiller les troupeaux. Ils étaient élevés généralement pour leur laine, mais une dizaine de milliers était consacrée à l'alimentation, notamment celle des dieux (lors des sacrifices) et de l'entourage royal. Les bovins étaient également importants dans l'économie agricole éblaïte (plus de 8 000 têtes selon des comptes).

Artisanat et commerce
Les activités artisanales à Ebla sont peu documentées par les textes en comparaison de l'agriculture. Là encore le contrôle de l'administration royale est important. Le palais d'Ebla employait des ouvriers textiles (travail de la laine et du lin), des forgerons et orfèvres, ainsi que des personnes spécialisées dans la transformation des produits agricoles, notamment des femmes (minoterie, boulangerie, brasserie, vinification, parfums, etc.). Certains de ces produits faisaient l'objet d'envois vers d'autres royaumes : c'est le cas de l'huile d'olive et de produits textiles, qui étaient apparemment les activités de manufacture les plus importantes contrôlées par le palais royal. La métallurgie était également une activité de premier plan, puisque le palais employait près de 500 ferronniers, ce qui constitue le plus grand regroupement d'artisans connu pour cette période, même en comptant les archives sumériennes. Les métaux travaillés (cuivre, argent, or) provenaient probablement de l'Anatolie voisine.
Les échanges sont connus par les tablettes de l'administration du palais enregistrant les entrées et les sorties d'objets. Il s'agit d'échanges effectués avec d'autres cours royales, probablement plus de type diplomatique que commercial. Mais ces sources révèlent ce à quoi devait ressembler le commerce international qui transparaît dans certaines sources. On sait que le palais employait ses propres marchands et qu'il s'arrangeait parfois pour leur assurer le monopole du commerce avec certains royaumes, comme cela se voit dans les clauses du traité passé avec Abarsal. Ebla se trouvait sur des routes commerciales importantes, notamment celles qui reliaient les zones d'extraction de métaux et de bois, en Anatolie et au nord du Levant, les ports de la façade méditerranéenne, et la riche Basse Mésopotamie qui était un lieu de consommation important de ces produits mais également un espace de transit de biens venant d'autres régions. Parmi les trouvailles effectuées dans le palais royal, il y a des objets venus d'Égypte, ainsi que du lapis-lazuli d'Afghanistan, ce qui témoigne de l'importance de l'échelle des échanges internationaux dans lesquels Ebla se trouvait impliquée. Les échanges de produits à l'intérieur du royaume se faisaient essentiellement dans le cadre des redistributions de produits par le palais à ses dépendants, et dans celui des impôts versés à l'État. Il semble que les fêtes religieuses aient été l'occasion de l'organisation de foires, comme c'est le cas à des périodes plus tardives de l'Antiquité.

La religion d'Ebla
Les divinités du panthéon éblaïte sont connues essentiellement grâce aux listes d'offrandes données chaque mois par le palais aux temples. On y découvre la plus ancienne religion de Syrie qui soit connue, offrant des parallèles avec les sources des périodes suivantes, notamment Emar et Ugarit. Le fonds culturel est essentiellement sémitique, mais on remarque des particularités locales ainsi que des influences sumériennes et dans une moindre mesure hourrites. Le grand dieu du royaume éblaïte est Kura, inconnu par ailleurs. En revanche, les autres divinités principales du panthéon éblaïte se retrouvent ailleurs aux périodes suivantes : Dagan, dieu de la fertilité très important en Syrie ; le dieu de l'Orage Adda (Addu, Hadad) ; le dieu-soleil désigné par l'idéogramme sumérien UTU ; Rashap (Reshep), divinité infernale ; Ishkhara, déesse de la fertilité et divinité chthonienne ; Ashtar (Ishtar, Astarté), déesse céleste identifiée à la planète Vénus ; le dieu Kakkab (« étoile ») ; Kamish (le futur dieu moabite Kemoch), sans doute une autre divinité chthonienne. Plusieurs divinités inconnues par ailleurs ou impossibles à identifier apparaissent dans les textes en plus de Kura, comme sa parèdre Barana ou NI-da-KUL dont la lecture du nom n'est pas comprise. Parmi les divinités non sémitiques, se trouve le dieu sumérien Enki, la déesse Ninki, ainsi que la déesse hourrite Hebat.
Quelques textes religieux ont également été exhumés, rédigés en sumérien et/ou en éblaïte. Des hymnes sont dédiés à des divinités importantes du panthéon. L'hymne au dieu-soleil Shamash est le plus long texte littéraire rédigé en éblaïte. On a aussi retrouvé le fragment d'un mythe mettant en scène des divinités sumériennes (Enki, Enlil, Utu), inconnu ailleurs. Le dernier type de texte religieux connu sont des collections d'exorcismes servant à conjurer des maux : morsures de serpents et d'insectes, maladies (notamment des maux de dents). Plusieurs rituels ayant lieu dans des temples ainsi que des fêtes dédiées aux divinités principales du panthéon sont attestées. Les Éblaïtes disposaient pour cela d'un calendrier religieux en parallèle à leur calendrier commun. On peut ajouter à ce tableau les rituels liés à la royauté évoqués précédemment, qui avaient un aspect religieux du fait de l'imbrication entre religieux et politique et du caractère sacré du pouvoir politique.

« … une table d'offrande … un plateau d'offrande (est placé) devant (la statue du) dieu de la nuit. Un plateau d'offrande avec ..., un plateau d'offrande avec des « pains purs », un contenant d'huile, un contenant de bière, un contenant zibar de vin, un vase avec un jet d'eau pour le dieu de la nuit. (...) pour un tissu noir avec lequel parer (la statue de) la femme du dieu de la nuit. Offrande de plateaux avant la nuit. (...) (Ce sont) des offrandes sacrificielles pour le dieu de la nuit à l'occasion de ... du roi. »

— Extrait du rituel au dieu de la nuit à Ébla (v. 2370 av. J.C.).
L'édifice cultuel le mieux connu pour la période proto-syrienne est un temple localisé dans la partie sud-est de la ville basse (zone H), le « Temple du Rocher » ou « Temple HH », qui doit son surnom au fait que ses fondations reposent sur un rocher. Il s'agit d'un édifice de dimensions 29 × 22 mètres, d'orientation est-ouest, constitué de deux pièces : un vestibule (à l'est) qui ouvre par une petite porte (1,40 mètre de large) sur une cella (à l'ouest) de disposition mesurant 10,50 mètres de long et 7,80 mètres de large chacune. Elles sont entourées de murs d'une épaisseur allant de 5,60 à plus de 6 mètres. Il s'agit d'un des plus anciens exemples connus de temples in antis (où les murs latéraux dépassent le mur de la façade vers l'extérieur) courants durant la Haute Antiquité syrienne, type attesté dans les temples éblaïtes des périodes suivantes, ainsi que sur d'autres sites voisins (Alep, Alalakh). On ne sait pas à quel dieu il était attribué : P. Matthiae propose Kura (ou bien Hadad). Après la première destruction d'Ebla, cet édifice est remplacé par deux temples : le « Temple HH4 », mesurant 17,30 × 10,90 mètres, lui aussi de type in antis, composé d'un vestibule et d'une cella allongée ; et le petit « Temple HH5 » (10,50 × 5,50 mètres), voisin du précédent et de forme semblable. Ces deux temples sont détruits à la fin de la période proto-syrienne. Un sondage sous le temple d'Ishtar de l'époque paléo-syrienne a conduit à la découverte d'un autre temple de l'époque proto-syrienne, le « Temple rouge » (ou Temple D2), nommé ainsi en raison de la couleur de ses briques. Son organisation est très similaire à celle du Temple du Rocher. Par sa proximité au secteur palatial, il semble important dans le culte officiel, et pourrait être le temple de Kura du secteur palatial (Saza), où se déroule une partie du principal rituel royal (puisque deux sanctuaires du dieu sont mentionnés dans le texte rituel).

Réalisations artistiques
Les fouilles des niveaux proto-syriens du palais royal ont permis de mettre au jour certains éléments de la décoration intérieure du bâtiment. Le seuil du quartier administratif et les marches de l'escalier d'honneur comportaient des incrustations de nacre. La cour intérieure du quartier administratif et la salle du trône disposaient de panneaux muraux dont certains étaient incrustés de feuilles d'or, d'éléments en calcaire ou en lapis-lazuli formant des figures, les seules parties de ces œuvres à avoir passé l'épreuve du temps ; la structure porteuse était sans doute en bois. Certains de ces panneaux représentaient des processions de fonctionnaires rendant hommage au souverain. Ces réalisations ont des parallèles à Mari à la même période, et même dans les objets incrustés de Sumer comme l'étendard d'Ur.
Le quartier administratif a également livré des statuettes composites, dont on a surtout conservé les éléments de coiffure, réalisés dans de la stéatite ou parfois en lapis-lazuli. Le corps des statues était en pierre dure ou en métal, et pouvait être orné de pierres précieuses, voire d'or. La décoration comprenait également des meubles marquetés et décorés parfois de petites figurines en marbre. On a identifié des tables ou des sièges faisant partie du mobilier du palais grâce à ce type de figurines. Elles représentaient parfois des rondes animales, ou bien des combats de héros et d'animaux mythologiques. Généralement, les thèmes de ces scènes comme ceux des sceaux-cylindres exhumés dans le palais sont identiques à ceux de la Mésopotamie contemporaine, malgré quelques originalités éblaïtes, comme la figure de la déesse domptant deux lions. Certaines scènes devaient représenter des mythes locaux qui nous sont inconnus. Tout cela témoigne en tout cas de la présence à Ebla d'une tradition d'artistes de qualité qui n'avaient rien à envier à ceux de Sumer.
Les fouilles ayant eu lieu dans le palais royal au début des années 2000 ont conduit à la découverte de nouveaux objets de la période archaïque. Les plus remarquables trouvailles ont eu lieu dans une petite pièce disposée sur le côté sud de la salle du trône, sans doute destinée à stocker les objets offerts au roi lors d'audiences : du lapis-lazuli brut, des incrustations en coquille et calcaire parfois recouverts de feuilles d'or, représentant des animaux ou des personnages et des parties de statuettes, dont des feuilles d'or destinées à recouvrir ce type d'objet et des chevelures en stéatite. Un sondage dans le secteur FF a permis de retrouver les restes d'un bâtiment de cette même époque, où ont été récupérés des fragments de peintures murales à motifs géométriques, témoignage unique sur la pratique de la peinture dans des bâtiments de la Syrie intérieure dans la seconde moitié du IIIe millénaire.

La fin d'Ebla
Peu de temps après le mariage d'une princesse éblaïte avec le prince mésopotamien de Kish, le palais royal d'Ebla est détruit et brûlé, selon toute vraisemblance dans la violence. Se pose donc la question de savoir qui est le responsable de cette chute. Le coupable idéal est l'empire d'Akkad, venu de Basse Mésopotamie et qui a soumis les autres grands royaumes de Mésopotamie du nord et de Syrie après 2340. On a pendant un temps attribué la destruction d'Ebla à Naram-Sîn, qui a régné sur Akkad vers le milieu du XXIIIe siècle, avant de privilégier son grand-père Sargon d'Akkad, fondateur de l'empire dans les dernières décennies du XXIVe siècle. Ces deux rois ont en tout cas mené des offensives en Syrie et soumis la région d'Ebla. Ils déclarent tous les deux avoir dominé la ville. Mais une autre hypothèse dit qu'Ebla a été détruite avant le règne de Sargon, ce qui invaliderait la destruction causée par les Akkadiens. Dans ce cas, c'est donc plutôt à Mari, l'ennemie héréditaire, qu'il faudrait attribuer la destruction du royaume éblaïte, qui aurait eu lieu au plus tard vers le milieu du XXIVe siècle. Mais cette hypothèse ne repose sur aucune preuve. Il semble qu'une seconde destruction ait dévasté le site après la première, alors que le palais ait été réoccupé après son premier abandon. L'auteur de cette seconde catastrophe est encore plus énigmatique que pour la première. Si les rois d'Akkad ne sont pas responsables de la première destruction, peut-être ont-ils causé la seconde, mais celle-ci est généralement datée d'une période plus tardive.

Ebla durant la période « paléo-syrienne » (c. 2000-1600 av. J.-C.)
Au début du IIe millénaire s'ouvre une nouvelle période de l'histoire d'Ebla, dénommée par les fouilleurs la période « paléo-syrienne ». Elle correspond à la période paléo-babylonienne (ou amorrite) de Mésopotamie et à l'âge du bronze moyen du Moyen-Orient. Si la période précédente était surtout connue surtout ar les sources épigraphiques, celle-ci l'est grâce aux découvertes de bâtiments et d'oeuvres artistiques.
Le XXe siècle avant J.-C. voit un renouveau de la ville d'Ebla, dans le contexte d'une Syrie dominée par des dynasties d'origine amorrite. C'est de cette période que date la statue de basalte du roi Ibbit-Lim qui a permis l'identification du site. En l'absence de sources épigraphiques, on ne sait presque rien sur le destin de la cité à cette période, d'autant plus que les archives de la cité de Mari, la source la plus importante pour l'histoire de la Syrie à la période amorrite, mentionnent très peu Ebla. Selon toute vraisemblance, ce royaume est alors dans la mouvance du puissant royaume d'Alep, le Yamhad.
Ebla est apparemment reconstruite suivant un plan prédéterminé, et elle connaît alors une extension plus grande qu'à la période proto-syrienne. La ville est comprise dans une vaste enceinte, disposant de plusieurs forts et portes. En son centre se trouvait l'acropole, elle-même défendue par sa propre muraille. La ville basse s'étendait à ses pieds, organisée autour d'une première ceinture de bâtiments officiels (temples et palais) aux pieds de l'acropole. Puis se trouvaient les quartiers d'habitation, où ont également été dégagés quelques bâtiments administratifs. Le tracé des rues suivait un plan relativement ordonné : des radiales partaient des portes et rejoignaient l'acropole, tandis que d'autres rues suivaient un plan perpendiculaire (axes est-ouest et nord-sud).

L'acropole
Une acropole d'environ 3 hectares dominait la ville d'Ebla, à l'emplacement du palais royal paléo-syrien. Cet espace contient deux monuments importants, mais les constructions n'y sont pas bien conservées. Cet ensemble est en réalité une citadelle, défendue par un rempart construit avec des blocs de pierre pour sa partie inférieure (sans doute haute de 4 mètres) et des briques crues sur la partie supérieure.

Le palais royal
Le nord de l'acropole était occupé par le palais E, identifié par P. Matthiae comme étant le palais royal. L'érosion l'a très durement touché et il n'en reste que peu de traces. Il a néanmoins été possible d'identifier une cour entourée de plusieurs salles (des pièces d'apparat ?) sur deux côtés, et fermée au sud par une loggia.

Le temple D
Sur la partie ouest de l'acropole, au point le plus élevé, se dressait le Temple D ou « grand temple ». Son plan était de facture classique : on pénétrait d'abord dans une salle allongée de 28 × 11 mètres, avant d'accéder à un vestibule précédé d'un porche, ouvrant sur la cella comportant une niche où se trouvait la statue de la divinité principale du sanctuaire, probablement la déesse Ishtar. Cette salle a livré un bassin lustral à deux vasques, décoré de bas-reliefs représentant une scène rituelle. C'est aussi dans cet édifice qu'on a retrouvé la statue fragmentaire en basalte inscrite au nom du roi Ibbit-Lim qui a permis d'identifier le site de Tell Mardikh comme étant l'antique Ebla.
Devant le temple D, une place était entourée de petites chapelles, constituant une zone sacrée, avec notamment le Petit Temple, où on a exhumé des statues votives et une stèle en basalte sculptée sur quatre faces, représentant une scène religieuse sur plusieurs registres, dominée par la figure d'Ishtar vêtue d'un kaunakès, debout sur un taureau, symbole de fertilité dans cette région (bien que son animal-attribut soit habituellement le lion). Il s'agissait probablement de la divinité principale de la cité à cette période.

La ville basse
Au pied de l'acropole et jusqu'à l'enceinte extérieure s'étendait l'espace appelé « ville basse » par les archéologues qui ont fouillé le site. L'acropole était ceinturée, au moins sur sa partie occidentale, par un ensemble de monuments publics (temples et palais) qui prolongeaient ses fonctions, mais devaient être plus accessibles.

Le système des fortifications
Le périmètre de la ville basse était délimité par une enceinte extérieure qui protégeait la cité. Elle était construite sur un remblai fait de terre prise à l'extérieur de la ville et mêlée à des pierres provenant des ruines des périodes précédentes. À l'extérieur, la base des murs était protégée par un parement de blocs de pierres sur 5 mètres de hauteur. La base des murs était large de 40 mètres environ et leur hauteur a pu atteindre 22 mètres.
Le système de défense était renforcé par une série de portes fortifiées et de fortins, auxquels les archéologues modernes ont donné des noms suivant leur localisation, leur nom antique étant perdu. Au nord-ouest, la « porte d'Alep » jouxtait la « forteresse AA » à l'ouest. Le côté ouest était défendu par le « fort V », et dans la zone Z, aux pieds du rempart, ont été dégagées plusieurs habitations cossues dont la « résidence occidentale » qui a pu avoir une fonction administrative. La « porte de Damas », au sud-ouest, était protégée par une tour de défense et un fortin. L'angle sud-est de la muraille comprenait une autre forteresse et la « porte du désert » (ou de la steppe). Le côté est de la muraille était défendu par la « Forteresse M », mesurant 27 × 13 mètres et constituée de deux rangées de pièces parallèles. Le côté nord-est était défendu par une autre forteresse, au nord de laquelle on trouvait une dernière porte (« porte de l'Euphrate »).

Le palais Q
Le palais Q, ou palais occidental, était situé à l'ouest de la ville basse, juste au pied du Grand Temple de l'acropole. D'orientation nord-sud, il avait une longueur de 115 mètres et une largeur maximale de 65 mètres environ et comprenait au moins une cinquantaine de pièces. Certains de ses murs sont encore bien conservés, leurs ruines s’élevant parfois à 3 mètres. La partie sud pourrait avoir compris un portique à colonnes servant d'entrée. Il ouvrait sur une suite de cours conduisant sur les pièces d'apparat, dont une salle du trône avec un portique à deux colonnes, et sur des espaces d'intendance avec des magasins où on a retrouvé des jarres de stockage. Sur sa partie nord au moins, le palais disposait d'un étage attesté par les restes d'escaliers. Il servait apparemment de résidence au prince héritier durant les dernières décennies d'Ebla, d'où le nom de « palais du prince » qui lui est parfois donné. Ce palais est en tout cas lié à la fonction royale, puisqu'il jouxte le temple dédié au culte des ancêtres royaux (« Temple B ») et que sous son sol ont été creusées des tombes pour les membres de la famille royale.

Les tombes royales
Le palais Q était bâti au-dessus de tombes souterraines, creusées dans des cavités naturelles aménagées pour accueillir les membres de la famille royale ayant vécu entre la fin du XIXe siècle et la première moitié du XVIIe siècle. On y accédait par un couloir à escaliers creusé sous l'édifice. Une dizaine de tombes ont été identifiées, dont seulement trois ont été inviolées durant l'Antiquité.
La plus ancienne des trois est la « tombe de la princesse » (v. 1800 av. J.-C.), où se trouvait le corps d'une jeune fille. Son accès était fermé par une grande dalle de calcaire. La défunte portait des bijoux en or (une épingle, un collier, des bracelets). La tombe comportait également plus de soixante-dix vases en céramique, des vases en pierre et une amphore en pâte de verre.
La tombe suivante, celle du « seigneur aux capridés » (v. 1750 av. J.-C.) occupait trois salles. Elle a été pillée lors de la destruction d'Ebla vers 1600 et le corps a disparu. On y a cependant retrouvé une soixantaine de vases en céramique, des vases en pierre, d'autres pièces de vaisselle (notamment une coupe en argent inscrite au nom d'Immeya, sans doute le défunt), des objets en ivoire dont le manche d'une masse d'armes incrustée d'un cylindre en argent au nom d'un pharaon obscur de la XIIIe dynastie. La tombe doit son nom au fait qu'on y a exhumé quatre statuettes en bronze représentant des capridés qui servaient sans doute à décorer un trône en bois et bronze.
La dernière sépulture est la « tombe des citernes » (première moitié du XVIIe siècle), nommée ainsi car installée dans une ancienne citerne, à laquelle on accédait depuis la précédente via un escalier. Ses pilleurs n'y ont laissé que des tessons de céramique et quelques bijoux, ainsi qu'une masse d'armes.
La richesse de ces tombes (en dépit des pillages) permet de les attribuer à des membres de la famille royale d'Ebla. Chacune des trois sépultures comprenait divers objets provenant d'Égypte : les deux masses d'armes de la tombe du seigneur aux capridés et de la tombe des citernes, ainsi que des vases en albâtre. Il s'agit peut-être de cadeaux diplomatiques, mais ils pourraient aussi provenir d'échanges commerciaux. D'autres objets rappellent ceux qui étaient produits par les artisans de la Babylonie amorrite.

Le palais P
Un dernier complexe palatial a été identifié au nord de la ville basse, le « palais P » ou « palais nord ». Il est peut-être bâti sur un ancien palais royal qui servait de centre administratif dans la dernière phase de la période proto-syrienne. Il était de forme trapézoïdale et couvrait environ 3 500 m2. Sa partie centrale était une zone résidentielle apparemment réservée au roi, et on y a même identifié ce qui pourrait être une salle du trône, parce qu'une estrade en pierre bâtie sur un de ses côtés aurait pu servir pour porter le trône royal. Une salle proche disposait d'un grand bassin en basalte. Les pièces situées au nord de l'édifice étaient des magasins. Il est possible que ce palais n'ait eu alors aucune fonction administrative, mais plutôt un rôle cultuel lié à la proximité du Temple P. Mais les fonctions exactes des trois espaces palatiaux identifiés pour cette période restent sujet à caution.

Les temples
Le « Temple P2 » se trouve dans la partie nord-ouest de la ville basse, dans une zone sacrée située entre le palais Q et le palais P, que P. Matthiae considère consacrée à la déesse Ishtar, en lien avec le temple de l'acropole. Le temple P2 est un édifice mesurant 33 × 20 mètres, disposant de murs très épais, ce qui en fait le plus grand temple de cette période dans la ville et même parmi ceux connus pour toute la Syrie d'alors. Il était constitué d'une grande pièce centrale précédée d'un porche in antis. Des fragments de statues représentant des souverains et des hauts dignitaires y ont été exhumées. La plus complète, haute de plus de 1 mètre, représente un dignitaire assis sur un siège, dans un style typique de la Syrie de cette période, qui trouve des parallèles à Alalakh ou Qatna. Un bassin cultuel sculpté a été mis au jour dans ce sanctuaire. On a également dégagé dans cette aire sacrée un « Monument P3 », qui présente un caractère massif. Il mesure 52,40 mètres de long pour 42 de large, est bâti avec des blocs de pierre entourant une cour (de 23,20 × 12,40 mètres) inaccessible de l'extérieur. Aucun mobilier n'y a été identifié. P. Matthiae a proposé d'y voir un endroit où on gardait des lions, animaux emblématiques de la déesse Ishtar. Le secteur P a également été le lieu de trouvailles de différents objets : figurines en terre cuite, deux serpents en bronze, un sceau-cylindre en hématite portant une scène cultuelle mettant peut-être en scène Ishtar, des coupes, ainsi que des fragments de métaux et pierres précieuses (or, argent, lapis-lazuli).
Dans la partie nord-est de la ville basse, un « Temple N », peut-être le temple du dieu-soleil Shamash, a été dégagé en retrait par rapport au reste des constructions. Un troisième temple dans cette partie de la ville vers le sud-ouest, le « Temple C », aurait été dédié au dieu chthonien Rashap. Il est de dimensions réduites ; on y a retrouvé deux bassins lustraux à deux vasques, sur lesquels ont été sculptées des scènes cultuelles.
Un autre sanctuaire a été identifié non loin du précédent, le « Temple B2 ». Il était organisé autour d'un espace central entouré de plusieurs pièces, le tout formant un bâtiment de forme irrégulière. Les murs de la salle principale étaient bordés de banquettes et d'un podium, et les petites pièces disposées autour comportaient des plates-formes identifiées comme étant des autels. Selon le fouilleur du site, il s'agissait d'un bâtiment dédié au culte des ancêtres royaux, pratique religieuse bien connue pour le Bronze récent grâce aux trouvailles épigraphiques d'Ugarit et archéologiques de Qatna. La salle centrale aurait servi pour les banquets organisés en l'honneur des défunts, tandis que les salles adjacentes auraient été des cellae dédiées aux différents rois décédés.
Enfin, le sanctuaire le plus récemment mis au jour pour cette période se trouve dans la partie sud-est de la ville basse, au-dessus de l'ancien Temple du Rocher. On lui connaît un premier état le « Temple HH3 », dont il ne reste que les fondations. Il est ensuite remplacé vers 1800 par le « Temple HH2 », mieux connu. Il s'agissait d'un temple in antis à façade, d'environ 25 mètres de long pour 16 de large, composé de 3 salles ayant toutes la même largeur (9,10 mètres) : un vestibule de 2,50 mètres de long, une ante-cella de 2,30 mètres de long et enfin une cella allongée (entre 9,50 et 10,50 mètres, le fond ayant disparu). Comme pour le Temple du Rocher, sa divinité tutélaire est inconnue.

Les résidences et le palais méridional
Les monuments construits au pied de l'acropole devaient être bordés par des quartiers résidentiels s'étendant au moins jusqu'à l'enceinte extérieure. Les fouilles des années 2000 ont permis de faire progresser la connaissance de ces secteurs. Quelques maisons ont été fouillées dans la ville basse juste au sud-ouest de l'acropole (zones B, Z et FF) et dans d'autres lieux de fouilles dispersés (zones A et Z près de deux portes, zone N au nord de l'acropole), certains de ces endroits montrant un échantillon de quartier d'habitat. Ces maisons étaient construites avec un soubassement de pierre, les parties supérieures des murs et sans doute le toit (en terrasse) étant en briques d'argile crues et les murs intérieurs recouverts d'enduit. L'organisation interne de ces résidences présentait des caractéristiques typiques des maisons du Levant de cette période. Les plus petites comptaient souvent un vestibule ouvrant sur un espace central d'où on parvenait à deux ou trois pièces. Les plus grandes avaient une organisation similaire mais comprenaient plus de salles. Elles utilisaient également des matériaux de meilleure qualité, puisque leur sol était peut-être couvert de dalles ou de calcaire broyé par endroits, alors que la plupart des résidences avaient des sols en terre battue. Plus on trouve de pièces, plus celles-ci présentent une division fonctionnelle de l'espace : il est ainsi possible de repérer des espaces de stockage, de cuisine, ou destinés aux activités économiques liées aux échanges.
Le palais FF est de loin la plus grande résidence mise au jour, avec ses 1 000 m2. Il a été désigné comme le « palais méridional ». Son organisation s'inspirait en effet du modèle de palais royal, notamment avec de vastes espaces de réception ; il jouxtait des écuries. Il pourrait s'agir de la résidence d'un grand dignitaire chargé de l'accueil de messagers (le vizir ?).

La destruction du site
Vers 1600, la ville d'Ebla est détruite à la suite d'un conflit. Là encore, le contexte de la destruction reste obscur. En l'état actuel des connaissances, le plus vraisemblable est de la relier aux offensives menées en Syrie par les Hittites, qui ravagent à la même époque d'autres cités de la mouvance du Yamhad, d'abord Alalakh sous Hattusili Ier (v. 1625-1600 av. J.-C.), puis la capitale Alep sous le règne de Mursili Ier (v. 1600-1585 av. J.-C.). Ils font ensuite subir le même sort à Babylone. En 1983 de notre ère, une tablette fut découverte dans les ruines de Hattusa, la capitale hittite, rédigée en hittite et en hourrite. Elle racontait le récit épique de la prise d'Ebla par un souverain hourrite inconnu, un certain Pizikarra de Ninive. Si l'on accepte la valeur historique de ce texte, il faut envisager que Pizikarra a agi pour le compte du roi hittite. Quoi qu'il en soit, le site d'Ebla est alors abandonné, même si le nom de la ville apparaît encore dans le récit d'une campagne du pharaon Thoutmôsis III au XVe siècle.

Phases tardives
Le site de Tell Mardikh a livré quelques trouvailles archéologiques des périodes plus tardives de l'Antiquité, mais il n'est alors plus qu'un modeste établissement rural. La période de domination achéménide (v. Ve – IVe siècle av. J.-C.) semble indiquer un renouveau de l'importance du site. Dans la partie nord de l'acropole, un petit édifice administratif (un « palazzetto » d'après les fouilleurs) comprenant plusieurs pièces organisées autour d'une cour rectangulaire a été dégagé. Le site de Tell Mardikh semblerait alors être un centre administratif ou agricole servant pour le pouvoir perse. Des restes de résidences du IIIe siècle de notre ère et d'un petit monastère datant des siècles suivants ont été mis au jour, après quoi il n'y a plus de trace d'une occupation durable du site.

Notes et références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
Syrie : Mémoire et Civilisation, Paris, Institut du monde arabe - Flammarion, 1993
Paolo Matthiae, Aux origines de la Syrie : Ebla retrouvée, Paris, Gallimard, coll. « Découvertes Gallimard / Archéologie » (no 276), 1996
(en) Amalia Catagnoti, « Ebla », dans Raymond Westbrook (dir.), A History of Ancient Near Eastern Law, vol. 1, Leyde, Brill, coll. « Handbuch der Orientalistik », 2003, p. 227-239
(en) Alfonso Archi et Maria Giovanna Biga, « A Victory over Mari and the Fall of Ebla », Journal of Cuneiform Studies, no 55,‎ 2003, p. 1-44
Pietro Mander, « Les dieux et le culte à Ebla », dans Gregorio del Olmo Lete (dir.), Mythologie et religion des sémites occidentaux : Volume I. Ébla, Mari, Louvain, Peeters, coll. « Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta », 2008, p. 1-160
(it) Paolo Matthiae, Ebla : La città del trono : Archeologia e storia, Turin, G. Einaudi, 2010
(en) Paolo Matthiae et Nicolò Marchetti (dir.), Ebla and its landscape : Early state formation in the ancient Near East, Walnut Creek, Left Coast Press, 2013
(en) Frances Pinnock, « Ebla », dans Harriet Crawford (dir.), The Sumerian World, Londres et New York, Routledge, 2013, p. 538-555

Liens externes
« EbDA » : Ebla digital archives, projet d'édition digitale des tablettes d'Ebla.
« Syria, Idlib, Ebla Photo Gallery », sur Homsonline
« cdli.ucla.edu Idlib Museum »

Articles connexes
Culture de la Syrie
Éblaïte
Période des dynasties archaïques
Écriture cunéiforme
Tablettes d'Ebla
Liste des villes du Proche-Orient ancien

 Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de la Syrie   Portail de l’archéologie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
UGARIT
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:30:10


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 3,977
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ugarit
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ugarit (; Ugaritic: 𐎜𐎂𐎗𐎚, ủgrt /ʾUgarītu/) was an ancient Levantine coastal city located in what is today northern Syria. The site, with its corpus of ancient cuneiform texts, was discovered in 1928. The texts were written in a previously unknown Northwest Semitic tongue—the Ugaritic language. Archaeological excavations of Ugarit show evidence of occupation since the 8th millennium BC. Research has focused on the late Bronze Age levels; relatively little is known about earlier occupation. The ongoing archaeological investigation of Ugarit has proven to be invaluable to the study of the Bronze Age in the eastern Mediterranean.
Ugarit is 10 km north of the Syrian city Latakia; at its zenith it ruled an area roughly equivalent to the modern Latakia Governorate. The ruins are often called "Ras Shamra" or "Tell Shamra" after the local place names.

History
Ugarit has its origins in the Neolithic period of the Fertile Crescent. The site was occupied from the end of the 8th millennium BC and continued as a settlement through the Near Eastern Chalcolithic and Bronze Ages until its destruction in c. 1185 BC. It was during the Late Bronze Age (c. 3300 – 1200 BC) that Ugarit saw significant growth, culminating in the establishment of the Kingdom of Ugarit.
The city had close ties to the Hittite Empire, in later periods as a vassal state. It sent tribute to Egypt at times, and maintained trade and diplomatic relations with Cyprus (then called Alashiya), as documented in archives recovered from the site and corroborated by Mycenaean and Cypriot pottery found there. The polity was at its height from c. 1450 BC until c. 1185 BC; when it was destroyed, possibly through a combination of invading Sea Peoples and internal struggles. The Kingdom of Ugarit would be one of the many polities that fell in the Late Bronze Age collapse of 12th century BC. Gibala (Tell Tweini), a coastal city at the southern edge of the Kingdom of Ugarit, was also destroyed at this time.

Middle Bronze Age
Middle Bronze II
Ugarit was associated with the Semitic-speaking Kingdom of Yamhad which emerged c. 1900 BC, centered near modern Aleppo in Northern Syria. Ugarit is mentioned in the cache of tablets written in Akkadian cuneiform which were recovered from the ancient Sumerian and Amorite city-state of Mari on the upper Euphrates in Syria, dated c. 1800 – 1750 BC
Ugarit had contacts with the Egyptian Middle Kingdom (c. 2000 – 1700 BC). One artifact is a carnelian bead inscribed with the name of Senusret I. A stela and a statuette from the Egyptian pharaohs Senusret III and Amenemhet III have also been recovered; it is unclear at what time these objects were brought to Ugarit.

Late Bronze Age
The city reached its golden age between 1500 BC and 1200 BC when it ruled a mercantile coastal kingdom, trading with Egypt, Cyprus, Aegean states (primarily Minoan Crete), polities in Syria, the Hittites, cities of the Levantine core (including Ascalon in Canaan), and much of the eastern Mediterranean. Five of the Egyptian Amarna letters from the mid-14th century BCE were written in Ugarit. The population of Ugarit in this period is estimated to be between 7,000 and 8,000 individuals. The kingdom of Ugarit controlled about 2,000 km2 on average.
In the mid-14th century BC, Ugarit was ruled by king Ammittamru I. A letter (EA45) sent by him, probably to pharaoh Amenhotep III (1388–1351 BC), expresses cordial diplomatic relations between the two. During the reign of his son Niqmaddu II (c. 1350–1315 BC) Ugarit became a vassal of the Hittite Empire, first under a viceroy in Karkemiš and then, with the Hititte collapse, directly under Karkemiš. Diplomatic relations with Egypt continued, as evidenced by two letters sent by Niqmaddu II (EA49) and his wife Ḫeba (EA48), probably sent to Akhenaten (1351–1334 BC). The former includes a request from the Egyptian king to send a physician to Ugarit.

Destruction
From the late 13th century into the early 12th century BC the eastern Mediterranean faced severe and widespread food shortages, possibly from crop failures due to plant disease. The kings of Ugarit—a major supplier and transporter of foodstuffs—received a number of desperate pleas for food from neighboring states. Eventually Ugarit itself faced shortage and hunger. A letter from Egyptian pharaoh Merenptah (r. 1213 – 1203 BC) referred to a message sent by the ruler of Ugarit:

So you had written to me: “Could I not have demanded my needs [from] the Great King, the king of Egypt, my lord? I demand this request: [In] the land of Ugarit there is a severe hunger (bi-ru-ú dan-niš): May my lord save [the land of Ugarit], and may the king give grain (ZÍZ.AN.MEŠ) to save my life … and to save the citizens of the land of Ugarit.

The last king of Ugarit, Ammurapi (c. 1215 – 1180 BC), was a contemporary of the last known Hittite king, Suppiluliuma II. A letter by Ammurapi stresses the seriousness of the crisis faced by many Near Eastern states due to attacks from outsiders (see Sea Peoples). Ugarit's army and navy joined with Hittite forces to stem the oncoming enemy; the allies eventually had to fall back from Anatolia to the Syrian frontier. Ammurapi's response to the king of Alashiya's appeal for assistance from highlights the desperate situation in Ugarit and across the eastern Mediterranean:

My father, behold, the enemy's ships came (here); my cities(?) were burned, and they did evil things in my country. Does not my father know that all my troops and chariots(?) are in the Land of Hatti, and all my ships are in the Land of Lukka? ... Thus, the country is abandoned to itself. May my father know it: the seven ships of the enemy that came here inflicted much damage upon us.

Eshuwara, the senior governor of Alashiya, responded:

As for the matter concerning those enemies: (it was) the people from your country (and) your own ships (who) did this! And (it was) the people from your country (who) committed these transgression(s) ... I am writing to inform you and protect you. Be aware!
In the end Ammurapi begged for forces from the Hittite viceroy at Karkemiš. The invaders had captured the kingdom's other port, Ra’šu, and were advancing on the city of Ugarit.

To the king, my lord say, thus Ammurapi, your servant.… I wrote you twice, thrice, [new]s regarding the enemy! … May my lord know that now the enemy forces are stationed at Ra’šu, and their avant-guard forces were sent to Ugarit. Now may my lord send me forces and chariots, and may my lord save me from the forces of this enemy!

The viceroy sent troops to assist Ugarit, but Ugarit had already been sacked when the Hittite forces reached the city. A letter written to the viceroy after the destruction said:

When your messenger arrived, the army was humiliated and the city was sacked. Our food in the threshing floors was burnt and the vineyards were also destroyed. Our city is sacked. May you know it! May you know it!

Rulers
Early in the excavations a partial text of the Ugarit King List, in Ugaritic, was found. Later, complete renditions in Akkadian were discovered. They list twenty six rulers, all deified. Only the later rulers are supported by texts or known synchronisms. Given that Ugarit was abandoned between the Middle and Late Bronze Ages it is thought that the earliest names on the list were more on the order of tribal chiefs than kings.

Archaeology
Archaeological soundings of Ugarit indicate that it was first occupied in the Neolithic period, no later than the eighth millennium BC. Only the highest—i.e., the newest—levels of the city's ruins have been excavated. The recovered evidence gives a picture of Ugaritic civilization just before its destruction in the Late Bronze Age collapse of the  late 12th century BC. This evidence includes many caches of cuneiform tablets found inside libraries.
While the chronology of the ancient Near East and that of ancient Egypt are not perfectly synchronized, the trove of Ugaritic texts and artifacts has proven invaluable for precise chronological dating.
For example, a recovered tablet shows that Chancellor Bay, an official of the Egyptian queen Twosret, was in communication with Ammurapi, the last ruler of Ugarit. It was already established that Bay was in office from approximately 1194 to 1190 BC. The two pieces of evidence together thus set an upper limit on the year of Ugarit's destruction: 1194 BC.
By the same method, the Ugarit trove allowed archaeologists to establish dates across the eastern Mediterranean with greater precision. For example:

The destruction levels of the ruins—i.e., the archaeological strata comprising Ugarit when it was destroyed—contain Late Helladic (LH) IIIB pottery but no pottery of the succeeding LH IIIC phase (see Mycenaean period). To fix an end date of Ugarit would thus prove crucial to establishing the chronology of the LH IIIC phase in mainland Greece.
An Egyptian sword bearing the name of pharaoh Merneptah was recovered from the destruction levels. A recovered cuneiform tablet showed that Ugarit was destroyed sometime after Merneptah's death in 1203 BC.
An early consensus held that Ugarit was destroyed by no later than the eighth year of the reign of pharaoh Ramesses III, 1178 BC.
Radiocarbon dating combined with translations of cuneiform records and the absolute dating of recorded astronomical events, e.g., an eclipse in 1192 BC, indicate destruction between 1192 and 1190 BC.
The beginning of the LH IIIC in mainland Greece could thus be dated to 1190 BC.
A large number of arrowheads were recovered from the destruction level in 2021. Their typology has not been published as yet.

Discovery and excavations
After its destruction in the early 12th century BC, Ugarit's location was forgotten until 1928 when a peasant accidentally opened an old tomb while plowing a field. At that time the region was part of the Alawite State and not in Syria. The uncovered area was the necropolis of Ugarit, located in the nearby seaport of Minet el-Beida. Excavations have since revealed a city with a prehistory reaching back to c. 6000 BC.
The site covers an area of about 28 hectares with a maximum height of 20 meters at the top of the acropolis. The site is surrounded by a city wall with one known fortified gate, though four gates are believed to have existed. Since the Late Bronze Age about 50 meters have been eroded from the north end of the site by the Nahr Chbayyeb river. The southern slope of the mound, or tell, is covered by orange groves, preventing excavation. A brief investigation of a looted tomb at the necropolis of Minet el-Beida was conducted by Léon Albanèse in 1928, who then examined the main tell of Ras Shamra. Beginning in 1929 excavations of Ugarit were conducted by a French team called the Mission de Ras Shamra led by archaeologist Claude Schaeffer from the Musée archéologique in Strasbourg. Work continued until 1939 when it was interrupted by the outbreak of World War II.
The French excavation, now the Mission Archeologique Française de Ras Shamra-Ougarit, resumed in 1950, led again by Claude Schaeffer until 1970. At that point, directorship passed to Jean Margueron. After 44 excavation seasons all of the numerous finds and their findspots were collated. In 2005 the excavation became a joint French and Syrian effort led by Valérie Matoïan and Khozama Al-Bahloul. Excavations were interrupted by the Syrian civil war, which began in 2011.
Archaeologists have defined a number of occupation strata at the site based on the excavations:

Strata 1 - 500-300 BC - Helenistic up thru Arabi
Lacuna - 900-600 BC - no occupation
Stratum 2 - 1100-900 BC - Iron Age
Stratum 3 - 1365-1200 BC - Late Bronze 2 = RS 1/3 = UR 3
Stratum 4 - 1450-1365 BC - Late Bronze 1-2 = RS 1/2 = UR 2
Stratum 5 - 1550-1450 BC - Late Bronze 1 = RS 1/1 = UR 1
Lacuna - 1650-1550 BC - no occupation
Stratum 6 - 1750-1650 BC - Middle Bronze '3' = RS 2/3 = UM 2
Stratum 7 - 1900-1750 BC - Middle Bronze '2' = RS 2/2 = UM 2 = Middle Minoan 2
Stratum 8 - 2100-1900 BC - Middle Bronze = RS 2/1 = UM 1
Stratum 9 - 2300-2100 BC - Early Bronze 4 = RS 3/3 or III A; = UA 3
Stratum 10 - 2500-2300 BC - Early Bronze 3 = RS 3/2 or III A 2 + 3; = UA 2
Stratum 11 - c. 2800 BC - Early Bronze 1 - 2 = RS 3/1 or III B-C; = UA 1
Stratum 12 - c. 3300 BC - 'Ubayd chalcolithic = RS 4 A-B (with some RS 3)
Stratum 13 - 4000 - 3400 BC - Halaf chalcolithic = RS 4-C (4 A-B)
Stratum 14 - c. 4000 BC - Neolithic with pottery = RS 5 A-B
Stratum 15 - c. 4500 BC - Pre-Pottery Neolithic = RS 5-C
A number of areas lay within the fortifications of Ugarit. In the northwest section was an acropolis with the temples of Dagon and Baal. In the west was the Royal Zone, including the Royal Palace. A fortress protecting the latter area was excavated, with the earliest elements dating back to the Middle Bronze Age. To the west of that lies the modern village of Ras Shamra. There were densely populated residential areas to the east of the Royal Zone and on the southern slope of the tell.

Cuneiform tablets
Several thousand cuneiform tablets have been found. By the Late Bronze age Ugarit had a thriving dual-scribal system. Primarily it used the East Semitic Akkadian language which acted as the lingua franca throughout the region for diplomacy, business, and administrative purposes. Other languages were also used "including Sumerian, Hittite, Hurrian, Egyptian, Cypro-Minoan, Phoenician, and Luwian". In parallel, there was scribal activity in the local Northwest Semitic Ugaritic language. A few scribes are known to have worked in both writing systems. A number of archives were found, the largest being that of the household of Urtēnu, a merchant with trading ties as far afield as Emar. This area of the tell was under military control at the time and about 100 tablets were found in the rubble from military construction. Later excavation found several hundred tablets in the actual home. One tablet mentions the enthronement of Kassite ruler Kadashman-Harbe II (c. 1223 BC) whose rule lasted less than a year, allowing a tight synchronism. The latest datable text was from the reign of Kassite ruler Meli-Shipak II (c. 1186–1172 BC) about the time of the destruction of Ugarit. An example of the archive involving one ton of copper:

Thus Kušmešuša, king of Alašiya, say to Niqmaddu, king of Ugarit, my son. All is well with me, my households, my countries, my wives, my sons, my troops, my horses and my chariots.… In exchange of the gift which you had sent me, I sent to you thirty-three (ingots of) copper; their weight is thirty talents and six-thousand and five-hundred shekels.

One small tablet written in Cypro-Minoan was found on the surface of the tell. While it traditionally has been assumed that syllabic texts are in the Akkadian language and alphabetic texts are in Ugaritic it has been suggested that much of the syllabic writing, especially in administrative documents, is actually in "a jargon where an Akkadian dialect is hard to detect given the great amount of Ugaritic elements it contained".

Royal palace
The Royal Palace was constructed over several major phases between the 15th and 13th centuries BC. It comprised rooms arranged around courtyards, encompassing 6,500 square meters before the city's destruction in the early 12th century BC. A tablet from the 14th century BC found in the Amarna archives, EA 89,  Rib-Hadda of Byblos likening the palace at Tyre to the grandeur found in the palace within Ugarit's walls. The palace was well constructed, predominantly crafted from stone, with preserved ashlar blocks reaching heights of up to 4 meters. Wooden crossbeams were also incorporated, inserted into slots within the stone masonry. A thick layer of plain plaster covered the walls. To the west of the palace was a set aside 10,000 square meter Royal Zone.

Archaeological findings within the ruins have included a variety of artifacts including ivory carvings, stone stele, figurines, and numerous tablets. These tablets were discovered in archives located across the palace; their contents encompass reports on outlying regions, judicial records—particularly from the south-central archives of the palace—and examples of practice writing by young scribes. Below ground, beneath two northern rooms, lay family tombs—three large chambers constructed with corbelled vaults—found devoid of any contents. The vanished upper floor likely accommodated the private quarters of the royal family, accessed via twelve staircases.

Acropolis
The Acropolis, positioned in the Ugarit's northeastern section, housed the city's primary temples dedicated to Baal and his father, Dagan. Though the existing remnants date to the Late Bronze Age, these temples might have their origins in the Middle Bronze Age. Stelai discovered in this area portray or name these gods, affirming their identification for the respective cults. Within the Temple of Baal, discoveries include the Baal with Thunderbolt depicting Baal holding a club aloft, portrayed in a typical Near Eastern and Egyptian artistic style as well as a stela bearing a dedication to Baal of Sapan. Numerous statues, stelai—some offered by Egyptians—and sixteen stone anchors were found as votive offerings in this vicinity.

Both temples are composed of a pronaos (porch) and a naos (sanctuary proper), aligned from north-northeast to south-southwest. The Temple of Dagan has 4–5-meter-thick foundation walls. Remnants of the Temple of Baal encompass sections of an enclosing wall, a likely courtyard altar, monumental steps leading to the elevated pronaos and naos, and another presumed altar within the naos. The temple was destroyed, possibly by an earthquake, in the mid 13th century and not rebuilt. The Temple of Dagan was also destroyed at that time but was rebuilt.
Another significant structure within the Acropolis was the House of the High Priest, situated west of the Temple of Dagan. This large, two-story residence, largely well-constructed, contained tablets containing mythological poems. Some tablets demonstrated writing exercises and included syllabic and bilingual lexicons, implying the building's use as a center for scribe training. Its proximity to the primary temples and the discovery of bronze tools, particularly four small adzes and a dedicated hoe, hints at its potential role as the residence of the city's chief priest. Among a cache of seventy-four bronze items uncovered beneath a doorway threshold inside the house, was an elegant tripod adorned with pomegranate-shaped pendants.

Ras Ibn Hani and Minet el Beida
Two other sites within the city of Ugarit, Ras Ibn Hani and Minet el Beida, have also been excavated. Ras Ibn Hani, on a promontory overlooking the Mediterranean 5 kilometers south of the city, was discovered during commercial construction in 1977. Salvage excavation occurred in 1977 followed by regular excavation which has continued to the present by a Syrian-French  team led by A. Bounni and J. Lagarce. Occupation began in the mid-13th century BC. Abandoned along with Ugarit, it was re-occupied in the Hellenistic period, including the construction of a defensive fortress. A "royal palace", elite housing, and tombs were found. About 169 cuneiform tablets, most in the Ugaritic language, were also found.

One of the two ports of ancient Ugarit (the other, Ra’šu, is unlocated but suggested to be Ras Ibn Hani) was located 1.5 kilometers west of the main city, at the natural harbor of Minet el Beida (Arabic for "White Harbor"). The 28 hectare site was excavated between 1929 and 1935 by Claude Schaeffer. The site is currently a military port and unavailable for excavation. Its name in the Late Bronze Age is believed to have been Maʾḫadu. Archaeological excavations carried out on the southern side of the bay, now reduced in size due to alluvial fill, unveiled remnants of a settlement established in the 14th century BC, and perhaps earlier, in the late 15th century. This port town, featuring an urban layout akin to the city of Ugarit, displays irregular street formations. Dwellings were structured around courtyards with adjacent rooms, including provisions like wells, ovens, and occasionally subterranean tombs. Besides residential spaces and shrines, warehouses were present for storing diverse goods earmarked for import or export. One of them was discovered still housing eighty shipping jars that remain remarkably intact.
Artifacts discovered in the port indicate the predominance of native Ugaritians within the local populace, accompanied by a significant presence of various foreign communities such as Egyptians, Cypriots, Hittites, Hurrians, and Aegean peoples. Among the discoveries were Cypriot pottery (both imported and locally crafted), Mycenaean pottery, ivory cosmetic containers from Egypt, a terracotta depiction of Hathor, bronze tools and weaponry, cylinder seals, stone weights, remnants of banded dye-murex shells used in the production of purple dye, and inscribed tablets.
The site is thought to have been largely evacuated before it was burned (resulting in a thick ash layer) and destroyed as few valuables were found in the residences or in the southern palace. About 130 cuneiform tablets were found in the northern palace. After the destruction the site was occupied by simple residences, termed a village by the excavators. Aegean style pottery and loom weights were found in this Iron Age I level.

Language and literature
Alphabet
Scribes in Ugarit appear to have developed the Ugaritic alphabet around 1400 BC; 30 letters, corresponding to sounds, were inscribed on clay tablets. Although they are cuneiform in appearance, the letters bear no relation to Mesopotamian cuneiform signs; instead, they appear to be related to the Egyptian-derived Phoenician alphabet. While the letters show little or no formal similarity to the Phoenician, the standard letter order (seen in the Phoenician alphabet as ʔ, B, G, D, H, W, Z, Ḥ, Ṭ, Y, K, L, M, N, S, ʕ, P, Ṣ, Q, R, Š, T) shows strong similarities between the two, suggesting that the Phoenician and Ugaritic systems were not wholly independent inventions. A Unicode block for Ugaritic has been defined.

Ugaritic language
The existence of the Ugaritic language is attested to in texts from the 14th through the 12th century BC. Ugaritic is usually classified as a Northwest Semitic language and therefore related to Hebrew, Aramaic, and Phoenician, among others. Its grammatical features are highly similar to those found in Classical Arabic and Akkadian. It possesses two genders (masculine and feminine), three cases for nouns and adjectives (nominative, accusative, and genitive); three numbers: (singular, dual, and plural); and verb aspects similar to those found in other Northwest Semitic languages. The word order in Ugaritic is verb–subject–object (VSO) and subject-object-verb (SOV); possessed–possessor (NG) (first element dependent on the function and second always in genitive case); and noun–adjective (NA) (both in the same case (i.e. congruent)).

Ugaritic literature
Apart from royal correspondence with neighboring Bronze Age monarchs, Ugaritic literature from tablets found in the city's libraries include mythological texts written in a poetic narrative, letters, legal documents such as land transfers, a few international treaties, and a number of administrative lists. Fragments of several poetic works have been identified: the "Legend of Keret", the "Legend of Danel", the Ba'al tales that detail Baal-Hadad's conflicts with Yam and Mot, among other fragments.

See also
Asherah
Cities of the ancient Near East
Short chronology timeline
List of Ugaritic deities
Ugaritic Vintage Rites

References
Further reading
External links
Ugarit (Tell Shamra) 1999 application for UNESCO World Heritage Site
RSTI. The Ras Shamra Tablet Inventory: an online catalog of inscribed objects from Ras Shamra-Ugarit produced at the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.
The Ras Shamra Tablet Inventory Blog
Ugarit and the Bible - Quartz Hill School of Theology
Le Royaume d'Ougarit (in French)
Dennis Pardee, Ugarit Ritual texts – Oriental Institute
Pictures from 2009


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 18,812
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ougarit
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ougarit (ou Ugarit) est une ancienne cité du Proche-Orient, située dans l'actuelle Ras Shamra (initialement nommée Ras ech-Chamra, « cap/colline du fenouil »), à onze kilomètres au nord de Lattaquié, en Syrie. C'est la capitale de l'ancien royaume homonyme qui a existé au IIe millénaire av. J.-C., au moins d'environ 1800 à 1185 av. J.-C., aux époques de l'âge du bronze moyen et récent. Les fouilles archéologiques qui y ont eu lieu depuis 1929 ont essentiellement concerné la dernière période d'occupation du site, à la fin de l'âge du bronze récent (v. 1350-1185 av. J.-C.) et ont permis d'accumuler une grande quantité de documentation et d'informations sur cette cité et le royaume qu'elle dirigeait. Elles sont complétées par les fouilles d'autres sites ayant appartenu au royaume, notamment le port de Minet el-Beida et la résidence palatiale de Ras Ibn Hani.
Le royaume d'Ougarit est d'une importance politique et militaire secondaire. Il est placé dans la mouvance des principaux royaumes dominant la Syrie : Alep, puis sans doute le Mittani, l'Égypte et enfin les Hittites à partir des environs de 1350 av. J.-C. Il contrôle un territoire d'une taille limitée, organisé autour de la plaine littorale syrienne qui permet le développement d'une agriculture méditerranéenne prospère. Son importance dérive avant tout de sa position littorale et de son port, qui lui permet de servir d'interface entre la Syrie intérieure et les réseaux d'échanges qui se développent alors sur la Méditerranée orientale et le mettent en contact avec les ports du Levant central et méridional, l'Égypte, Chypre, la côte anatolienne et la Grèce mycénienne.
Les fouilles d'Ougarit ont permis de dégager un important palais royal, des temples, des résidences de tailles diverses donnant des informations sur les différentes couches de sa population. Elles ont également livré plus de 4 000 tablettes cunéiformes, dont la moitié approximativement est rédigée en akkadien (babylonien) cunéiforme, la langue diplomatique et savante de l'époque et comprend notamment des textes sur les relations entre les rois d'Ougarit et leurs maîtres hittites, et l'autre dans l'alphabet ougaritique, un alphabet cunéiforme développé à Ougarit au moins après 1250 av. J.-C., pour transcrire la langue locale, elle aussi nommée ougaritique. Cette ville est la plus ancienne connue à avoir employé un alphabet de manière courante. Cette documentation comprend notamment des textes mythologiques et rituels documentant la religion locale.
Au début du XIIe siècle av. J.-C., vers 1185 av. J.-C., Ougarit est détruite et pillée, et disparaît au même moment que les Hittites. Cette destruction survient dans le contexte de l'effondrement de l'âge du bronze récent, et est peut-être causée par les Peuples de la mer qui attaquent l'Égypte au même moment. Il est à noter que la mythique guerre de Troie, racontée dans l'Iliade d'Homère, se produisit au même moment, selon les datations homériques et classiques. À la suite de ces événements, la ville est désertée et le royaume n'est pas reconstitué. Le site de Ras Shamra sera repeuplé de manière sporadique durant l'Antiquité, mais ne redeviendra jamais une ville importante.

Fouilles et redécouverte
La redécouverte du royaume d'Ougarit commence par celle du site de Minet el-Beida, quand au début de l'année 1928 un paysan labourant son champ met au jour une tombe. La Syrie étant alors sous mandat français, les autorités françaises conduisent un premier repérage qui débouche sur l'organisation d'une mission archéologique. Le directeur des Antiquités orientales du Louvre, René Dussaud, en confie la direction à Claude Schaeffer, jusqu'alors spécialisé dans la Préhistoire européenne, avec la charge d'explorer également le tell voisin de Ras Shamra. Des tablettes d'argile portant des signes cunéiformes y sont rapidement découvertes et connaissent un retentissement important puisqu'il ne s'agit pas uniquement de l'habituel cunéiforme composé de centaines de signes syllabiques et logographiques, mais aussi d'une forme inconnue jusqu'alors composée de bien moins de signes. Grâce aux travaux combinés de Hans Bauer, Édouard Dhorme et Charles Virolleaud, on comprend assez vite qu'il s'agit d'un alphabet de type ouest-sémitique semblable aux alphabets phénicien et hébraïque, écrit dans une langue locale elle aussi de type ouest-sémitique. Son déchiffrement donne une nouvelle dimension à l'exploration du site en permettant la redécouverte de l'inattendue civilisation ougaritique.
Les fouilles de Minet el-Beida sont arrêtées dès 1935, alors qu'elle se poursuivent à Ras Shamra jusqu'en 1939 quand la guerre contraint la mission française à quitter la Syrie. Sur cette période, elles se concentrent surtout sur le point culminant du site, l'Acropole, qui livre de nombreux objets et quelques quartiers d'habitations situés en contrebas. La zone du palais commence à être explorée.
La Syrie devient indépendante en 1946. La mission archéologique française revient dès 1948 mais les travaux de grande ampleur ne sont autorisés par les nouvelles autorités qu'en 1950. Elles s'attellent surtout dans un premier temps à dégager le palais royal, ce qui offre une nouvelle moisson d'objets et de tablettes. Les fouilles s'étendent aussi aux grands bâtiments voisins. Puis à partir de 1959 deux grandes tranchées sont ouvertes dans les zones résidentielles (ville sud et sud-acropole). En 1960, des équipes syriennes dirigées par Adnan Bounni et Nassib Saliby fouillent aussi une installation d'eau d'époque romaine. La quantité de documentation disponible devient considérable.
De 1971 à 1974 la direction des fouilles est reprise par Henri de Contenson, puis en 1975 à 1976 Jean-Claude Margueron prend sa suite. Cette période voit le dégagement de nouvelles zones, et l'achèvement d'un grand sondage à l'ouest de l'Acropole (1962-1976) qui a permis d'aller jusqu'aux origines de l'occupation du site, à l'époque néolithique. En 1978, Marguerite Yon prend la direction des fouilles, jusqu'en 1998. L'étude de la topographie urbaine se poursuit par l'ouverture de nouveaux chantiers (centre de la ville, sud-centre où se trouve la maison d'Ourtenou).
Les fouilles ont livré une grande quantité de documentation, épigraphique et autre, qui sont publiées dès les débuts des fouilles dans diverses publications. Les rapports de fouilles sont publiés chaque année dans la revue Syria, et d'autres études paraissent dans diverses revues. De 1939 à 1969 la série Ugaritica (6 volumes) se spécialise dans la publication d'articles sur l'analyse des données issues des fouilles du site. De 1955 à 1970 la série Palais Royal d'Ugarit (5 volumes, numérotés de 2 à 6) sert pour les éditions de tablettes mises au jour dans le palais royal et les bâtiments voisins. Un des axes des recherches initiées à partir de 1978 a aussi consisté à exploiter les données des fouilles antérieures qui n'avaient pas été publiées. En 1983 débute la série Ras Shamra - Ougarit (28 volumes en 2021), qui comprend des monographies et des ouvrages collectifs. La fin de cette phase voit la publication d'importantes synthèses sur le site, par Marguerite Yon, Gabriel Saadé et sous forme collective dirigée par Wilfred Watson et Nicolas Wyatt.
Les campagnes de fouilles se sont étendues à d'autres sites de la région de Lattaquié potentiellement intégrés ou du moins contemporains du royaume d'Ougarit. Dès 1934 le suisse Emile Forrer réalise des sondages à Qal'at er-Russ et Tell Soukas dans la plaine de Jablé, mais cette période est surtout marquée par les fouilles entreprises à Al-Mina par le Britannique Leonard Woolley, qui livrent un site commercial de première importance, postérieur à Ougarit puisqu'il date de l'âge du fer. L'exploration de la région s'intensifie et s'internationalise à partir de la fin des années 1950. De 1958 à 1963 une équipe danoise dirigée par Paul J. Riis sonde et fouille trois sites de la plaine de Jablé, Tell Soukas, Tell Darrouk et Arab el-Mouk, qui couvrent différentes phases de l'histoire de la région. Au pied du djebel Aqra, le site de Rass el-Bassit est fouillé sous la direction de Paul Courbin à partir de 1970. En 1977 c'est le site de Ras Ibn Hani, voisin de Ras Shamra, qui commence à être fouillé par des équipes syro-françaises dirigées par Adnan Bounni et Jacques Lagarce, qui y dégagent notamment deux palais et des fortifications de l'époque du royaume d'Ougarit. Les prospections conduites par Gabriel Saadé dans la plaine de Lattaquié permettent d'approfondir les connaissances sur le passé de la région. Dans les années 1990 les équipes syriennes entreprennent la fouille de Tell Siyannou dans la région de Jablé, qui présente une longue occupation et est mentionné dans les textes d'Ougarit sous le même nom de Siyannou. D'autres sites voisins sont fouillés : Tell Toueini par une mission syro-belge codirigée par Karel Van Lerberghe et Tell Iris par Antoine Souleiman. Une équipe syro-japonaise codirigée par Akira Tsuneki reprend en 2000 l'exploration de Ras el-Bassit et Nahr er-Russ. Un programme syrien d'ampleur régionale visait aussi à explorer le littoral sous-marin et à inventorier les sites côtiers.
En 1999 la mission archéologique de Ras Shamra devient syro-française et est confiée à Yves Calvet côté français et Bassam Jamous côté syrien, qui en assurent la direction jusqu'en 2008. Après cela les responsables sont Valérie Matoïan et Jamal Haydar, jusqu'à l'interruption des chantiers en 2011 en raison de la guerre civile syrienne. Les fouilles reprennent avec la seule partie syrienne en 2014 sous la direction de Khozama al-Bahloul. Côté français les recherches se sont poursuivies en se réorientant du fait de l'impossibilité de fouiller le site.

Histoire du royaume d'Ougarit
Absente de la documentation écrite du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C., Ougarit est mentionnée dans les archives de Mari (v. 1810-1760 av. J.-C.) puis celles d'Alalakh (XVIIe siècle av. J.-C.), au Bronze moyen. La ville a peut-être fait l'objet d'une refondation vers 1800 av. J.-C., à l'initiative d'un groupe amorrite (l'ethnie la plus répandue en Syrie à cette époque). Des tablettes du bronze récent comprennent des noms d'anciens rois d'Ougarit qui reçoivent un culte funéraire, les plus anciens remontant probablement à cette période. Faute de sources complémentaires, il est impossible d'en savoir plus sur ces personnages. Les textes de Mari indiquent que cette cité est alors vassale du puissant royaume du Yamhad (Alep), et le roi de Mari, Zimri-Lim, allié du roi d'Alep, y effectue un voyage durant lequel il rencontre son roi. Il entre aussi en contact avec des marchands crétois, ce qui semble indiquer que la ville est déjà un centre important pour le commerce international.
Ougarit est surtout connue pour l'âge du Bronze récent (v. 1500-1200 av. J.-C.), en particulier durant ses dernières phases, les premières décennies étant très mal documentées.

Il n'y a pas de preuve directe que le Mittani, puissance dominant la Syrie au début de la période, ait dominé Ougarit, même si cela a souvent été supposé. La cité semble passer sous la domination égyptienne durant le règne d'Amenhotep III, dans la première moitié du XIVe siècle av. J.-C. Des fragments de lettres provenant d'Ougarit ont été mises au jour à Tell el-Amarna, parmi la correspondance des vassaux levantins de l'Égypte (Lettres d'Amarna), notamment une adressée par le roi Ammistamrou Ier (EA 45) et une autre par son successeur Niqmaddou II (EA 49).
Cette période correspond au moment où la Syrie passe sous la coupe des Hittites, dirigés par Suppiluliuma Ier. Niqmaddou II (v. 1350-1315) passe sous sa domination, et conclut un traité de vassalité avec son nouveau maître. Ce changement d'allégeance lui permet notamment de pacifier ses relations avec le royaume de Mukish (dont la capitale est Alalakh), autre vassal des Hittites, et de fixer leur frontière commune.
Son fils et successeur Ar-halba (v. 1315-1313) participe à une révolte de vassaux syriens contre le roi hittite suivant, Mursili II, qui réussit à vaincre les rebelles. Ar-Halba est alors remplacé par son frère Niqmepa (v. 1315-1260), qui se soumet à Mursili II, et conclut un nouveau traité avec lui. Les frontières avec le Mukish sont alors confirmées à nouveau, mais Ougarit perd pour des raisons non déterminées la suzeraineté qu'elle exerçait jusqu'alors sur les royaumes situés au sud du sien, Siyannou et Oushnatou (qui semblent en fait avoir un unique souverain). Elle se voit cependant accorder un allègement de son tribut. Ougarit est mentionné par Ramsès II parmi les participants à la coalition hittite qu'il affronte à Qadesh. Après cette période que la domination hittite sur la Syrie s'exerce avant tout par l'intermédiaire des « vices-rois » de Karkemish.
À la mort de Niqmepa, son fils Ammistamrou II (v. 1260-1235) monte sur le trône d'Ougarit. Son règne est marqué par l'éviction de deux de ses frères, peut-être à l'initiative de la reine-mère Ahat-milkou, et l'épisode de son divorce avec la fille du roi Bentesina d'Amurru, autre vassal des Hittites, qui cause des remous parce qu'elle est manifestement liée par sa mère à la famille royale hittite. Ibiranou (v. 1235-1210) lui succède, puis Niqmaddou III (1220-1200), dont l'épouse est apparemment une princesse hittite.

La fin d'Ougarit
Ammourapi (v. 1200-1185) est roi d'Ougarit au moment de sa chute, vers 1185 avant J.-C. Des lettres de la dernière époque d'Ougarit mentionnent des attaques d'ennemis non nommés qui se déplacent sur des bateaux. Alors que l'Empire hittite se désagrège au même moment dans des circonstances inconnues, la ville d'Ougarit et d'autres sites du royaume et des pays voisins subissent des destructions importantes. Après cela et pour une raison inconnue, la capitale est abandonnée, alors que les autres sites sont réoccupés.
Il est généralement considéré que ce sont les assauts de populations grecques, probablement ceux que les chroniques égyptiennes appellent « Peuples de la mer » à la même époque, qui détruisirent la cité, mais sans preuve décisive. La mythique guerre de Troie, chantée par l'aède Homère quelques siècles après les faits, aurait eu lieu à la même époque, et par ailleurs des parallèles ont pu être établis entre les noms des Peuples de la mer cités dans les chroniques égyptiennes et les noms de peuples grecs et indo-européens connus postérieurement. Ces indices ainsi que quelques autres semblent suggérer que des population grecques doriennes auraient attaqué les côtes de l'Anatolie (Turquie actuelle, où se situe le site de la ville de Troie et où régnait l'Empire hittite détruit au même moment), du Levant (où se situent Ougarit, Tyr, Sidon et Byblos) et de l'Egypte. Toutefois, en l'absence de preuves plus directes, les historiens sont réduits aux conjectures.

Le site archéologique d'Ougarit (Ras Shamra)
Phases anciennes
Deux sondages ont fait remonter l'habitat sur le site de Ras Shamra au Néolithique, en identifiant un niveau (V C) pour le PPNB tardif (v. 7500-7000 av. J.-C.) des traces d'habitat et des objets, notamment des silex et du mobilier lourd, et des indications que l'agriculture est pratiquée dès les niveaux les plus anciens, ainsi que l'élevage, même si la chasse et la pêche restent à ce stade prépondérants pour la subsistance. La céramique apparaît durant la seconde période connue (V B, v. 7000-6500) sous les formes caractéristiques des débuts de cet artisanat en Syrie, d'abord une céramique grossière (Soft ware) puis une céramique lustrée monochrome (Dark Faced Burnished Ware). Cette période voit aussi l'apparition d'indices d'une activité de tissage (fusaïoles). Par la suite (niveau V A, 6500-6000) la céramique peinte apparaît, l'usage de la chaux se développe (vaisselle blanche). La place de l'agriculture et de l'élevage augmente avec le temps.
Le site a également fourni des indications d'occupations à la fin du Néolithique (niveau III C, v. 5500-4500) et au début du Chalcolithique (niveau IV, 4500-4000), périodes durant lesquelles se décèle l'influence des cultures de Halaf puis d'Obeid. L'habitat se complexifie, la métallurgie du cuivre apparaît. Le secteur sondé est ensuite abandonné pendant environ un millénaire, l'occupation reprenant au Bronze ancien (niveau III A, v. 3000-2000). Le site se dote de caractéristiques urbaines : mur d'enceinte, rues, architecture en pierre. L'artisanat céramique et métallurgique se développent, ainsi que les échanges avec les régions voisines (vallée de l'Oronte, Levant méridional). Vers 2200 la région connaît une crise, et le site semble abandonné un temps.

Après 2000, au début du Bronze moyen (niveau II), le site connaît un renouveau. Plusieurs groupes de populations ont été identifiés lors des fouilles anciennes en fonction de critères matériels : les « creuseurs de silos », les « porteurs de torques », les « bâtisseurs de caveaux ». Cela est généralement interprété comme l'indication de l'arrivée de nouvelles populations dans la région (Amorrites ?). Les connaissances sur la période restent limitées : sur la phase 1900-1650 la ville connaît un développement, elle pourrait alors couvrir tout le tell, est protégée par une muraille puissante, des objets provenant de Chypre et d’Égypte indiquent un élargissement des échanges.

Le plan de la ville au bronze récent
Plan de Ras Shamra avec la localisation des zones fouillées, par la Mission archéologique syro-française de Ras Shamra, sur le site Archeologie.culture.gouv.fr.
L'essentiel des découvertes archéologiques effectuées à Ras Shamra concernent la période finale du site, celle de l'âge du bronze récent (niveau I du site, v. 1600-1185). La ville d'Ougarit est alors de loin la plus grande du royaume. Ses ruines forment actuellement un tell de plus de 25 hectares. De part et d'autre de celui-ci, deux cours d'eau, le Nahr ed-Delbé et le Nahr Chbayyeb, coulent en direction de la mer. L'état qui est connu est celui qui est en place après un séisme qui a lieu vers 1250, qui semble avoir été particulièrement destructeur, et qui a pu modifier des aspects du tissu urbain.
Il n'y a pas forcément de principe d'organisation de l'ensemble de l'espace urbain, la ville semblant s'être « développée au hasard au cours des siècles » selon M. Yon. Néanmoins selon J.-C. Margueron la ville est organisée suivant un axe directeur structurant l'inscrivant la topographie régionale, puisqu'il relie le pont-barrage, l'Acropole et le Mont Saphon, et son organisation interne repose sur un réseau de fondations créant une infrastructure compartimentée (organisant les îlots d'habitations et permettant de consolider les maisons à plusieurs étages), pensé au préalable et reproduit lors de chaque reconstruction.
La partie ouest du site est dominée par le secteur palatial, qui couvre environ 10 000 m2, isolée du reste de la ville. La partie orientale est dominée par l'« acropole » où se trouvent les deux sanctuaires principaux de la ville, dédiés à Baal et à Dagan. Le reste du tell est occupé par des zones résidentielles. Des élargissements des rues à certaines intersections forment des sortes de places, et des voies de circulation plus ou moins larges ont été identifiées. L'entrée principale se trouvait au sud de la ville, traversée par un grand axe de circulation qui enjambait le Nahr ed-Delbé par un pont-barrage, et se prolongeait par une grande rue remontant vers la ville haute. Les autres entrées n'ont pas été identifiées.

Les fortifications
La zone palatiale était défendue par un rempart à glacis de pierre, qui a été identifié dans la partie occidentale du site, où il dispose d'une forteresse protégeant la zone palatiale. Ce dispositif semble érigé vers la fin du Bronze moyen ou le début du Bronze récent. On y trouvait un accès secondaire à la citadelle : une rampe conduisait à une porte défendue par une tour carrée, avec une poterne et une couloir. Dans la dernière période d'occupation du site, la poterne est bouchée et une nouvelle rampe est construite, qui en cache l'entrée. En dehors de cet endroit aucun système de fortifications n'a été identifié avec certitude : n'y avait-il aucune enceinte pour protéger la ville, ou bien est-ce qu'il n'a pas encore été mis au jour ?

Les aménagements hydrauliques
Ougarit est située dans une zone de climat méditerranéen où les niveaux de précipitations peuvent être très irréguliers, aussi bien durant l'année que d'une année sur l'autre, aussi il est crucial pour ses habitants de s'assurer un approvisionnement régulier en eau. Deux cours d'eau encadrent le site, le Nahr Chbayyeb au nord et le Nahr ed-Delbé au sud et une nappe phréatique est contenue dans les grès marins situés sous le site. Ils sont alimentés en eau depuis les plateaux s'élevant à l'est, avec sans doute une période basse en été, si tant est que les deux cours d'eau, qui sont courts, aient été pérennes. Un pont-barrage a été fouillé sur le Nahr ed-Delbé, qui serait daté du Bronze récent (il pourrait être bien plus tardif, d'époque hellénistique ou romaine) et créerait une retenue d'eau appréciable pour sécuriser la ressource. Deux ou trois sources se trouvent dans le voisinage du site et ont pu servir d'appoint pour l'alimentation comme pour l'irrigation. Il n'empêche que la nappe phréatique a probablement été la première pourvoyeuse d'eau pour les habitants d'Ougarit, qui ont creusé des puits pour y accéder (à 10-15 mètres de profondeur). Un grand nombre a été identifié lors des fouilles des espaces résidentiels. Des descentes en terre cuite y redirigent également les eaux de pluie. Des cuves en pierre servent aussi à collecter l'eau. Les salles d'eau sont difficiles à identifier, en revanche des latrines ont été repérées aux rez-de-chaussée des habitations, souvent sous l'escalier. Des puisards collectent les eaux usées.

La zone du palais
Plan schématique du Palais royal, par la Mission archéologique syro-française de Ras Shamra, sur le site Archeologie.culture.gouv.fr.
La zone d'environ 10 000 m2 où se trouvait le palais royal est située au nord-ouest du tell, séparée du reste de la ville par une muraille et protégée par une forteresse. L'accès se fait à l'ouest par une porte percée dans la muraille, conduisant à une place donnant sur l'entrée principale du palais sur son côté est, ainsi qu'à la ville par un poste de garde. Sa partie nord comprend le « bâtiment aux piliers » , qui devait servir à des réceptions et banquets, et le « temple hourrite » ou « temple du palais », une chapelle palatiale en forme de « temple-tour ».
Le palais en lui-même couvre 6 500 m2. Il a été construit et étendu en plusieurs phases, à partir du XIVe siècle av. J.-C. (sur l'emplacement d'un palais plus ancien ?). La pierre de taille est le matériau de base, les murs étant parfois préservés jusqu'à 4 mètres de haut. Des poutres et des élévations en briques crues renforçaient la solidité des murs. L'édifice disposait d'un étage, dont la présence est notamment signalée par des escaliers. Au rez-de-chaussée, il dispose d'une entrée monumentale à l'ouest, ouvrant sur la zone destinée aux activités publiques. Une première cour mène à des espaces de banquet et à la salle du trône. Les autres zones servent aux fonctions domestiques ou privées. Un jardin occupe la partie est de l'édifice, entouré de magasins et de pièces qui ont sans doute un usage privé. Une autre salle au sud dispose d'un bassin d'agrément. Au nord se trouve la nécropole souterraine de la famille royale. L'étage devait comprendre les appartements royaux ainsi qu'un espace administratif, qui s'est effondré après la destruction du site (comme l'indiquent les trouvailles de tablettes au milieu des débris).

Au nord-est de la zone palatiale se trouve un autre grand édifice qualifié de « Palais nord », qui semble être un ancien palais royal délaissé autour de 1400. Le « Palais sud », situé au sud de la zone palatiale est quant à lui une vaste résidence dont l'occupant le mieux connu est Yabninou, un personnage de haut rang dans le royaume.

L'acropole et les temples
La zone dite de l'acropole se trouvait au nord-est de la ville, et surplombait le reste des quartiers d'habitations d'une vingtaine de mètres. C'est manifestement la zone sacrée de la ville, puisqu'on y trouvait les deux temples de la cité, attribués suivant des inscriptions retrouvées sur place aux divinités Baal et Dagan (ce dernier temple serait plutôt dédié à El selon H. Niehr). Érigés vers le début du Bronze récent, ils avaient tous deux la forme d'une tour, ce qui leur permettait d'être visibles de très loin. Ils sont détruits par le séisme qui a lieu vers 1250. Le temple de Baal est reconstruit, sans doute sur le plan antérieur. Il dispose d'un espace sacré d'environ 850 m2, avec une cour d'entrée circonscrite par une enceinte au centre de laquelle se trouve un autel. Sa base mesure 16 × 22 mètres, divisée entre un vestibule bas conduisant au corps de bâtiment principal, comprenant une cella barlongue et un escalier permettait l'accès à la terrasse, qui devait s'élever à environ 20 mètres de hauteur et devait servir de « haut lieu » pour les sacrifices. Le temple de Dagan; qui avait une organisation similaire, n'est en revanche pas reconstruit après le séisme, ce qui pourrait indiquer une certaine désaffection vis-à-vis de ce dieu. Le culte se poursuit en plein air, sur le socle de l'édifice détruit qui a été déblayé et où ont été installées des stèles. La présence de la « Maison du Grand Prêtre » entre les deux sanctuaires semble liée à leur existence : c'est un bâtiment qui a livré des objets inscrits au nom du « chef des prêtres » et un important lot de tablettes, dont des textes mythologiques.
Un autre temple, le « temple aux rhytons », a été fouillé dans une zone résidentielle (« centre de la ville ») où il est intégré à un îlot d'habitation. Il dispose d'une grande salle et a pu servir de lieu de réunion d'une confrérie.

Les maisons
La ville d'Ougarit était occupée par des espaces résidentiels, fouillés dans plusieurs secteurs (« centre de la ville », « ville sud », « quartier résidentiel », « sud acropole », « ville-basse ») qui ont notamment permis de dégager de nombreuses maisons. L'espace est organisé de façon irrégulière et densément occupé : les maisons sont regroupées en îlots de tailles diverses, séparés par des rues et impasses souvent minces et tortueuses. Leurs murs sont construits en moellons, avec une superstructure en briques crues et pisé, parfois de la pierre de taille pour renforcer les angles. Leur taille au sol est très variable : autour de 80/100 m2 en moyenne, de quelques dizaines de mètres à plus de 500 m2 pour celles des plus riches, jusqu'à 1 000 m2 (« maison de Yabninou »/« Palais sud ») ; il faut y ajouter la présence d'un étage et de terrasses aménagées, accessibles par des escaliers. Il n'y avait pas de séparation de l'espace par la richesse, les habitations des plus riches côtoyant celles des plus modestes. De la même manière aucun quartier spécifiquement dédié à une activité artisanale n'a été identifié.

L'organisation interne des maisons varie beaucoup. Les traits communs étant le peu d'ouvertures vers l'extérieur, la présence de cours, ou du moins de sortes de puits de lumière suffisamment larges pour permettre diffuser la lumière et d'aérer le rez-de-chaussée. Des aménagements hydrauliques permettent l'alimentation en eau (puits, canalisations). Certaines pièces ont des fonctions utilitaires, notamment le stockage, voire des espaces d'activités comme des boutiques ou des ateliers, ainsi que dans les plus grandes maisons des pièces pour loger les animaux (ânes et chevaux). La vie privée devait plutôt se dérouler aux étages, qui semblent présents dans la plupart des maisons (au moins une, plus rarement deux) et ont dû comporter les pièces à coucher, et sur les terrasses qui ont un rôle important dans la vie quotidienne puisqu'il s'agit souvent du seul espace en plein air où peuvent se dérouler des activités. Certaines maisons ont fourni des lots d'archives privées. Des sépultures ont été construites sous plusieurs maisons. Les quartiers résidentiels comportaient également des bâtiments où on se livrait à une activité artisanale, ainsi que des petits temples.

Les sépultures
Plus de 200 caveaux en pierre construits sous des maisons ont été identifiés à Ougarit, ce qui en fait un corpus exceptionnel pour analyser les pratiques funéraires de la Syrie du Bronze récent. Certains datés du Bronze moyen ont également été identifiés. Ils sont constitués d'une chambre à laquelle on accède par un couloir en pente (dromos). Les chambres construites en moellons et recouverts de dalles plates sont de loin les plus courantes. D'autres, moins nombreux, plus grands et surtout datés des époques tardives, sont construits en pierre de taille et voûtées en encorbellement. Il s'agit de tombes collectives accueillant plusieurs générations de défunts. Étant donné qu'elles ont été pillées dès l'Antiquité, le matériel qu'elles ont livré est limité. On accède en général aux sépultures depuis l'intérieur des maisons et elles sont étroitement associées à l'habitat, intégrées dans son architecture, ce qui implique qu'elles aient été construites en même temps. Elles se trouvent en plus grand nombre dans les zones résidentielles où l'habitat est plus dense et compact (31 identifiées sur les 7 000 m2 du secteur « ville basse », au nord-est du tell), tandis qu'elles sont moins nombreuses aux abords du palais royal où les résidences sont en général plus vastes (une dizaine de tombes). Pour autant, toutes les résidences ne disposent pas d'un caveau, ce qui pourrait indiquer que les habitants de certaines maisons utilisent ceux situés sous d'autres (parce qu'il s'agit d'une même famille). Certaines tombes étaient d'ailleurs accessibles depuis l'extérieur, sans passer par une maison.

Dernières périodes de la ville
Le site de Ras Shamra subit une destruction majeure autour de 1185, caractérisée par des incendies dans ses édifices majeurs et de nombreuses parties de la ville. La présence de pointes de flèches dans plusieurs endroits pourrait indiquer que cette destruction a été violente. Elle est couramment attribuée aux « Peuples de la mer », mais en l'absence de preuves, les chercheurs en sont réduits à des hypothèses. Cette interprétation repose notamment sur le fait que d'autres sites du royaume d'Ougarit (Ras Ibn Hani, Tell Toueini notamment) sont alors détruits et réoccupés par une population qui a une culture matérielle de type égéen (grecque) ou chypriote, qui semble typique des groupes rattachés aux « Peuples de la mer ». Il est du reste possible qu'il y ait eu plusieurs épisodes de destructions qui se sont succédé. Cela marque en tout cas la fin du royaume d'Ougarit. La ville d'Ougarit est largement dépeuplée dans les années qui suivent. Cela ne veut pas dire qu'elle soit complètement abandonnée, puisqu'il y a en plusieurs endroits des traces de réoccupation de résidences par une population pratiquant l'élevage. Les sépultures sont également pillées à cette période.

Les occupations postérieures
Après la fin de l'âge du bronze, le site de Ras Shamra est réoccupé de manière sporadique par endroits. Une occupation datée de l'époque perse, des Ve – IVe siècle av. J.-C., est connue par des restes de maisons et de sépultures.

L'extension géographique du royaume et les autres sites
Durant sa dernière période d'existence, donc après plusieurs pertes territoriales, le royaume d'Ougarit s'étend sur plus de 2 200 km2, mesurant plus d'une soixantaine de kilomètres du nord au sud et une trentaine à une cinquantaine de kilomètres d'est en ouest selon les endroits ; avant cela, il a peut-être dépassé les 5 000 km2. Il s'est développé principalement sur la plaine littorale syrienne, autour de la plaine fertile de Lattaquié, où se trouvent Ougarit et le cœur du royaume, arrosée par plusieurs fleuves débouchant du plateau de Bahlouliyé, le plus important étant le Nahr el-Kébir. Il s'agit d'une des plaines les plus vastes et fertiles du Levant, donc d'un des principaux facteurs de la prospérité d'Ougarit. La position littorale est l'autre atout majeur. La côte est certes souvent rocheuse, avec des anses qui sont en général de taille réduite et peu propices à l'implantation de ports, mais celle de Minet el-Beida, le port d'Ougarit, est un des rares abris naturels de qualité de la région et a indéniablement favorisé l'essor commercial de la cité. Le royaume est limité au nord par le Djébel Aqra (le mont Saphon) et le massif du Baer-Bassit, qui le séparent du royaume de Mukish (capitale Alalakh), et à l'est par le Djébel Ansariyé, qui surplombe le plateau de Bahlouliyé qui constitue la partie orientale du royaume ; les pays situés à l'est d'Ougarit sont Niya et le Noukhashshe. Au sud, il n'y a pas de barrière naturelle : les limites du royaume se trouvaient quelque part dans la plaine du Jablé, peut-être jusqu'au niveau de Tell Soukas, voire un peu plus bas. C'est une autre plaine littorale bien arrosée et propice au développement de l'agriculture. Là se trouve le pays de Siyannou et d'Oushnatou, qui devient indépendant d'Ougarit vers la fin du XIVe siècle av. J.-C.. Plus au sud encore se trouvent la cité insulaire d'Arwad et le royaume d'Amurru (capitale Sumur, à Tell Kazel).
Deux autres sites d'importance notable situés au cœur de l'ancien royaume d'Ougarit ont également été fouillés : Minet el-Beida (l'antique Mahadou ?), le port d'Ougarit, situé à un kilomètre de la capitale, a été fouillé de 1929 à 1935, mais l'installation d'une base militaire y empêche de nouvelles fouilles ; Ras Ibn Hani (Rashou ?), avec son Palais Nord, une résidence palatiale (des tablettes y attestent la présence d'une reine-mère) d'environ 2 500 m2, située sur une presqu'île surplombant la mer Méditerranée, cinq kilomètres à l'ouest de la capitale. Au nord du royaume, le site de Ras el-Bassit, situé sur un cap aux pieds du Djébel Aqra, a livré des édifices du bronze récent, dont une grande résidence de la période finale. D'autres agglomérations ont été mises au jour dans la plaine de Jablé, à la limite méridionale du royaume ou dans le pays de Siyannou : Tell Toueini, près de l'actuelle Jablé, à proximité de la mer, correspond sans doute à l'antique Gibala, une ville marchande importante ; Tell Soukas, un peu plus au sud, peut-être la ville de Souksi (au Siyannou) ; Tell Siyannou, plus à l'intérieur, correspondent vraisemblablement à la capitale du pays de Siyannou ; Tell Iris, à proximité de ce dernier.

Les textes d'Ougarit
Les lots d'archives
Les fouilles d'Ougarit ont permis la mise au jour de plusieurs centaines de tablettes cunéiformes (plus de 4 000 selon une estimation). Selon un inventaire effectué en 1998 par O. Pedersén, on peut isoler 17 lots d'archives principaux, en plus de trouvailles éparses. Il n'y a pas d'indication que les Ougaritains aient tenu des archives sur papyrus, en revanche il semble qu'ils aient également écrit sur des tablettes en bois couvertes de cire, matière qui ne se préserve pas.
Dans le palais royal, cinq lots d'archives principaux ont été trouvés dans des parties différentes du palais, qui ont chacun au moins un sujet de prédilection, voire dans certains cas une spécialisation, même si chaque archive peut comprendre tout type de textes. Les archives ouest, est et sud-ouest sont principalement administratives, les archives centrales comprennent des actes juridiques officiels, notamment les textes sur les propriétés immobilières, les archives sud la correspondance internationale et des textes juridiques. Mais des lettres royales ont aussi été retrouvées dans les archives est et centrale. En revanche il n'y a aucune organisation par écriture et langue : les textes en alphabet ougaritique et en cunéiforme syllabique sont mélangés. Peu de textes scolaires et littéraires ont été retrouvés dans le palais. Chaque archive fonctionne donc comme une sorte de bureau spécialisé, en général situé dans un groupe de pièces du rez-de-chaussée, près d'une cour, donc avec une source de lumière naturelle pour permettre aux scribes de travailler dans les meilleures conditions. Par endroits (apparemment dans le cas des archives centrales), les tablettes sont stockées à l'étage. La durée de conservation des textes dépend de leur nature et de leurs potentiels usages futurs : les textes juridiques ou les traités internationaux sont gardés longtemps, en revanche les textes administratifs ne le sont pas. En tout cas les archives ne semblent pas remonter plus haut que le milieu du XIVe siècle av. J.-C., le sort des textes plus anciens n'étant pas déterminé. Rien n'indique que des tablettes aient été cuites de manière intentionnelle afin de permettre de les conserver plus longtemps (l'argile cuite étant très résistante). Un groupe de tablettes mis au jour dans la cour au bassin aurait selon l'interprétation de leur découvreur été placé dans un four, de manière à les cuire, découverte qui a rencontré un certain écho. Une analyse postérieure du dossier a révélé qu'il n'y avait probablement pas eu de four à cet endroit, et que ces tablettes avaient été cuites dans un incendie antérieur à la fin du palais.

Les autres lots ont été mis au jour dans des résidences de la ville, que l'on désigne couramment comme des archives « privées ». Les plus importants groupes de textes scolaires, littéraires et liturgiques (surtout en akkadien associé au sumérien et en ougaritique, aussi en hourrite) ont été mis au jour dans la « maison du Grand Prêtre », la « bibliothèque de Lamashtou », la « maison aux textes littéraires », la « maison aux textes médico-magiques », etc.. Les maisons des plus importants dignitaires du royaume ont en général été surnommées d'après un des plus importants personnages apparaissant dans leurs archives, qui contiennent avant tout des textes économiques, administratifs, juridiques, épistolaires et aussi scolaires : la « maison de Rapanou », la « maison d'Ourtenou », la « maison de Rasapabou » et la « maison de Yabninou » (ou « Palais sud »). La nature « privée » de ces archives est discutée, car le public et le privé sont difficiles à séparer à cette période. Certes on y trouve les archives des familles qui y résident, mais pas seulement : une partie de la correspondance officielle a ainsi été mise au jour dans la résidence d'Ourtenou, ainsi que la copie d'un traité. Ces personnages ayant des fonctions dans l'administration du royaume, ils conservent la documentation liée à celles-ci dans leurs propres résidences, qui fonctionnent aussi comme leur bureau professionnel.

Écritures et langues
Ville commerciale par excellence, Ougarit est de ce fait une place cosmopolite. Cela se retrouve dans le fait qu'on y a trouvé des documents dans cinq écritures et huit langues différentes. Le système cunéiforme traditionnel, mêlant logogrammes et syllabogrammes, sert à noter l'akkadien, le sumérien, le hittite et le hourrite. La langue locale, l'ougaritique, est notée dans un alphabet cunéiforme, l'alphabet ougaritique (qui est aussi parfois employé pour noter de l'akkadien et du hourrite). On trouve également quelques documents en égyptien, en hiéroglyphes (notamment des vases et des scarabées), en louvite noté en hiéroglyphes hittites, et en cypro-minoen, une écriture originaire de Chypre qui note une langue inconnue. Le corpus écrit se partage pour l'essentiel entre les tablettes d'argiles écrites en akkadien cunéiforme et celles écrites en alphabet ougaritique.

L'akkadien est la langue de la Mésopotamie, répandue au Proche-Orient sous sa forme babylonienne. Elle est écrite en cunéiforme, dont la base est phonétique (syllabique), mais elle intègre des logogrammes (on parle aussi d'idéogrammes), qui renvoient à l'origine au sumérien, la première langue écrite en Mésopotamie, qui se retrouve par leur biais dans les textes à Ougarit. L'akkadien est la lingua franca du Bronze récent : c'est la langue de la diplomatie, du grand commerce, du droit, aussi celle du milieu savant, et elle est employée avant tout dans ces domaines à Ougarit. La forme d'akkadien des textes d'Ougarit est une des variantes dites « périphériques », puisqu'elle repose certes sur l'akkadien cunéiforme tel qu'il est pratiqué en Mésopotamie à la même époque, mais elle intègre couramment des éléments de vocabulaire voire de morphologie et de syntaxe qui sont repris des langues ouest-sémitiques du Levant (souvent qualifiées de « cananéennes »), dont l'ougaritique. Il ne s'agit donc probablement pas d'une langue parlée, plutôt d'une sorte de « code » élaboré dans ces régions par des générations de scribes.

L'alphabet ougaritique est une écriture développée à Ougarit pour transcrire la langue ougaritique. Les circonstances de son invention restent obscures. Il s'appuie manifestement sur les formes plus anciennes d'alphabets linéaires (« proto-sinaïtiques ») puisqu'il semble leur reprendre la forme de certains signes, mais en les transposant dans une graphie cunéiforme, plus propre à être notée sur des tablettes d'argile. Il reprend également leur principe qui consiste à ne noter que les consonnes, qui sera celui des alphabets sémitiques qui leur succèdent, mais il dispose de 30 signes (il transcrit 27 phonèmes, puisque trois signes sont des variantes d'un autre), ce qui est plus que les autres alphabets sémitiques qui se contentent en général de 22 signes. Les plus anciens exemples de cette écriture remontent au milieu du XIIIe siècle av. J.-C., qui semble être sa période d'invention. Sa période d'existence assurée s'étend donc d'environ 1250 à 1185 av. J.-C. et son usage est essentiellement local (il n'est quasiment pas attesté en dehors de ce royaume) et s'étend à la plupart des types de textes connus à Ougarit, avec une prédilection pour les textes administratifs et ceux qui sont le plus liés au fonds culturel local comme les textes mythologiques, rituels, ainsi que des lettres. C'est en tout cas le premier système alphabétique pour lequel on dispose d'une documentation en grande quantité (autour de 2 000 documents). Deux autres alphabets cunéiformes sont aussi connus par des documents isolés provenant d'Ougarit.

Nature des textes
Les textes mis au jour à Ougarit sont rangés dans quelques catégories principales, indépendamment de la langue dans laquelle ils sont écrits.

Les textes administratifs (ou économiques, de gestion) sont comme souvent dans le monde cunéiforme la catégorie la plus représentée. Cette catégorie comprend des documents enregistrant des livraisons de biens, des listes de noms de personnes et de villages qui ont manifestement une finalité fiscale (dans les archives du palais), des documents relatifs à des affaires commerciales, à la gestion de domaines, à des prêts, ainsi que des étiquettes en argile servant à indiquer le contenu de livraisons auxquelles elles étaient attachées.
Les listes lexicales constituent une grande proportion des textes mis au jour à Ougarit, surtout dans les résidences. Il s'agit de listes de signes et de mots, organisés en colonnes, souvent des syllabaires et des vocabulaires servant à la formation des apprentis scribes ou d'aide pour des scribes professionnels. Ces textes sont issus de la tradition lettrée mésopotamienne, et Ougarit a livré des exemplaires des listes les plus courantes, comme l'« encyclopédie » bilingue sumérien-akkadien nommée Urra = ḫubullu. Les scribes d'Ougarit avaient adapté ces sortes de dictionnaires bilingues à leurs propres besoins en y ajoutant une colonne pour l'ougaritique, voire pour le hourrite.
Les textes juridiques, majoritairement rédigés en akkadien suivant des formulaires inspirés de ceux de la tradition babylonienne. Ils concernent des affaires internes, notamment des donations royales, actes authentifiés par le sceau royal. Les actes juridiques mis au jour dans les archives privées concernent également les propriétés mais également les personnes. Les actes relevant du droit international sont les traités de vassalité conclus avec le roi hittite et les décrets promulgués par le vice-roi de Karkemish.
Les textes épistolaires, qui peuvent être divisés entre la correspondance locale et la correspondance internationale. La première catégorie comprend des lettres circulant à l'intérieur du royaume, surtout rédigées en ougaritique, mais aussi en akkadien. Une partie des lettres connues relèvent de la correspondance de la famille royale, entre membres de celle-ci ou avec leurs serviteurs proches. Certaines lettres rédigées en ougaritique sont adressées par des rois étrangers, celui des Hittites et celui de Tyr : comme ces cours ne pratiquent pas cette écriture, il pourrait s'agir de copies d'originaux en akkadien. La correspondance internationale est en effet rédigée en akkadien suivant des codes précis, notamment sur l'adresse (le nom de la personne la plus importante est cité en premier, qu'il s'agisse de l'expéditeur ou du récepteur). Elle concerne essentiellement les royaumes syriens et levantins, en plus du suzerain hittite, mais aussi Chypre et l’Égypte. Il y est surtout question d'affaires commerciales.
Les textes religieux sont une catégorie connue dans des quantités moindres que les précédentes, mais qui a plus particulièrement attiré l'attention en raison de la présence d'une littérature propre à Ougarit. On y trouve en effet la trentaine de textes mythologiques en ougaritique, notamment le Cycle de Baal, qui sont des œuvres littéraires à proprement parler employant un style poétique. Les autres textes religieux sont issus de la pratique des prêtres ougaritains, surtout des textes rituels relatifs à des sacrifices. Quelques textes d'incantations sont également connus.
Les textes littéraires, parmi lesquels beaucoup sont rédigés en akkadien et comprennent des épopées (Épopée de Gilgamesh, Atrahasis), des hymnes divins, des textes sapientiaux, ainsi que des textes rituels comme des recueils de présages divinatoires et d'incantations magiques. Il s'agit d'un corpus représentatif de la culture babylonienne telle qu'elle est apprise dans la partie occidentale du monde pratiquant le cunéiforme (Syrie, Hittites), servant avant tout dans le milieu scolaire pour l'apprentissage des scribes (les textes sont souvent fautifs). Plus rares, certains textes littéraires sont écrits dans la langue propre à Ougarit, l'ougaritique, il s'agit le plus souvent de légendes épiques (Légende de Kéret, Légende de Danel et d'Aqhat). Certains textes enfin sont en langue hourrite et l'on compte parmi eux une tablette de notation musicale.

Les scribes et la culture lettrée
Les scribes ougaritains suivant le cursus le plus classique devaient au moins connaître l'akkadien, avec des rudiments de sumérien nécessaires à la compréhension de l'écriture cunéiforme (car c'est de cette langue que dérivent les logogrammes), en plus de leur langue maternelle, l'ougaritique. Il ne s'agit pas forcément d'un bilinguisme à proprement parler, mais plutôt d'un « biscriptisme », la maîtrise de l'écriture de l'akkadien cunéiforme, qui plus est sous une forme reprenant des éléments de l'idiome local, n'impliquant pas de savoir le parler au quotidien.
Qui plus est, la présence de logogrammes qui n'ont pas de valeur phonétique et peuvent être lus dans plusieurs langues fait que les liens entre langue et écriture ne sont pas si évidents que cela. L'apprentissage du cunéiforme traditionnel se faisait par la méthode mise au point en Mésopotamie, en se reposant sur les listes lexicales, donc des inventaires de signes plus ou moins élaborés, les plus simples étant des syllabaires permettant de se familiariser avec les signes phonétiques, le niveau supérieur étant représenté par des sortes de dictionnaires bilingues sumérien-akkadien, qui permettent d'apprendre des logogrammes. La rédaction de textes littéraires plus complexes issus de la tradition mésopotamienne permettait de passer à un stade plus avancé. Le cursus d'apprentissage de l'alphabet ougaritique s'inspire du modèle mésopotamien : des abécédaires permettent un apprentissage des signes, puis des listes lexicales multilingues avec une colonne en ougaritique permettent d'acquérir le vocabulaire. Des exercices de copies de mots, notamment des noms de personnes et de divinités, font également partie du cursus dans les deux écritures.
Il n'y a pas d'écoles à proprement parler, les textes littéraires étant retrouvés dans divers lieux où se trouvent des textes écrits, ce qui indique que l'apprentissage était dispensé par des scribes expérimentés là où ils avaient l'habitude de travailler. Le métier de scribe s'exerce souvent au sein d'une même famille, par exemple celle de Nou'mi-Rashap qui sert les rois d'Ougarit pendant au moins trois générations.
Les scribes ougaritains maîtrisaient donc manifestement depuis plusieurs générations l'akkadien cunéiforme avec la « culture cunéiforme » qui l'accompagne, comprenant notamment ses méthodes d'enseignement et un corpus de textes tels que la fameuse Épopée de Gilgamesh, des hymnes aux dieux Shamash et Marduk, des textes divinatoires, des sagesses, etc. que les apprentis scribes devaient copier pour parachever leur formation. Sur cette base, ils ont développé l'alphabet ougaritique, son enseignement et une tradition scribale proprement ougaritaine, avec son propre corpus de textes. Ils se sont pour cela largement inspiré du modèle mésopotamien, mais ont également témoigné d'un indéniable sens de l'innovation : ils mettent au point des formulaires spécifiques pour les textes administratifs ou juridiques ; il n'y a pas de traductions parmi les textes littéraires et rituels en ougaritique, qui sont des créations locales. En fin de compte, les scribes ougaritains étaient « au croisement de deux cultures : ils étaient versés dans l'éducation scribale mésopotamienne, mais demeuraient soucieux d'affirmer leur propre identité culturelle, non seulement en notant leur langue avec leur écriture, mais aussi en ayant leur propre littérature et leur propre idée de la composition des documents de la vie quotidienne. »

Organisation et vie politique
Le roi et sa famille
Le premier personnage du royaume ougaritique est le roi (ougaritique maliku). Il est le centre de l'autorité et du pouvoir dans le royaume. Selon la conception de l'époque, reposant sur la notion de « Maison » (aussi bien au sens propre que figuré), le royaume est conçu comme un ensemble de Maisons des pères de famille du royaume, réunis et englobés dans la Maison du roi, qui elle-même est subordonnée à celle des dieux. En effet, comme dans le reste du Proche-Orient ancien, son pouvoir repose sur une légitimité divine : il est à son poste parce qu'il a été choisi par les dieux (les dieux ayant un aspect souverain étant El et Baal) et agit en tant que leur représentant terrestre, conformément à leur volonté.
L'autre volet de la légitimité royale est dynastique : le roi occupe son trône parce qu'il est le descendant de la lignée dynastique qui dirige Ougarit, ce que symbolise notamment le fait que les derniers rois d'Ougarit authentifient leurs actes avec le sceau du roi Yaqarou fils de Niqmaddou (ou plutôt une copie de celui-ci), considéré comme le fondateur de leur dynastie. L'importance du culte des ancêtres royaux reflète également cet aspect de la légitimité royale. Le poème épique Danel et Aqhat, débutant sur les difficultés du roi Danel à avoir un héritier, renvoie également à cette question. En pratique, durant les derniers règnes, le choix doit être avalisé par le suzerain hittite, qui constitue alors une troisième forme de légitimité, politique, nécessaire pour obtenir le trône d'Ougarit.
Le roi dirige donc la politique et l'administration de son royaume. Cela se voit dans les relations diplomatiques, les accords avec les autres royaumes étant passés en son nom, il est également le chef des armées, même si cet aspect semble peu prononcé à Ougarit. Du point de vue interne, il est le garant de la justice et de l'équité, donc le juge suprême du royaume, auquel on peut en principe faire appel en dernier ressort, bien que cela ne semble pas avoir été courant puisqu'il délègue ses prérogatives judiciaires au préfet. Il s'occupe néanmoins des crimes les plus graves, notamment si elles impliquent des ressortissants étrangers. Il est en revanche très impliqué dans les affaires rituelles, ce qui est une conséquence de son statut d'élu des dieux et de lien entre les sphères humaine et divine. Il entretient les sanctuaires, gère leur personnel, et exécute personnellement les sacrifices lors des rites les plus importants. Il doit également assurer le culte des anciens rois divinisés, et il les rejoint à sa mort, prenant alors le statut d'être d'essence divine qui veille sur le royaume.
Parmi les membres de la famille royale, seule la reine (mlk.t) paraît avoir une influence importante. Les rois sont polygames mais il existe une hiérarchie. Le titre de reine est porté par la femme la plus importante du palais, qui n'est pas forcément l'épouse principale du roi puisque tant que la mère du roi est vivante elle le conserve. Les mariages diplomatiques étant courants, la reine est généralement d'origine étrangère, et son mariage s'accompagne du versement d'une importante dot, qui lui assure un confort économique. Le contenu de la dot est documenté dans le cas d'Ahat-milku, une princesse d'Amurru mariée à Niqmepa, qui joue un rôle important sous le règne de son fils Ammistamrou II. Elle intervient notamment pour régler une affaire au sein de la famille royale causée par un crime de deux princes contre leur frère Ammistamrou, en assurant qu'ils soient exilés à Alashiya (Chypre) avec leur part d'héritage. La reine peut donc jouer un rôle politique important, et aussi diplomatique : elle peut remplacer le roi lorsqu'il se déplace hors du royaume (rôle aussi dévolu au préfet du Palais), et entretient des relations avec des cours étrangères. L'influence de la reine se manifeste aussi par le fait qu'elle dispose de sa propre « Maison » qu'elle gère librement avec son personnel, tient sa propre correspondance et conduit des affaires économiques, notamment l'acquisition de propriétés foncières et des opérations commerciales (elle dispose de marchands travaillant pour son compte). Deux affaires de divorces de l'épouse principale d'un roi sont connues, qui ont eu une grande importance politique puisqu'elles concernent une princesse d'Amurru (et probable fille d'une princesse hittite) épouse d'Ammistamrou II, coupable d'une faute indéterminée (peut-être un adultère), en tout cas très grave puisqu'elle est exécutée, et une princesse hittite épouse d'Ammourapi, cas mal documenté.

Administration
L'administration du royaume est documentée par les tablettes administratives et juridiques mises au jour à Ougarit, qui laissent néanmoins de nombreux points dans l'obscurité. Si on l'analyse comme une organisation caractérisée par une domination de type « patrimonial », le royaume est conçu comme le patrimoine du souverain, qui le gère, pour le compte des dieux, comme un chef de maison ou père de famille, dans lequel les fonctions administratives ont des contours flous et les compétences des représentants du roi peuvent se chevaucher. Le plus déterminant est alors la position dans la hiérarchie et le lien personnel éventuellement entretenu avec le roi, qui place dans son entourage proche ceux en qui il a le plus confiance et leur confie les missions les plus importantes. Les relations d'autorité et d'obéissance reposant à tous les niveaux sur les principes qui existent au sein d'un foyer domestique, cela implique que les personnages-clés de l'administration n'ont pas de fonctions spécialisées, mais ils reprennent pour l'essentiel les attributions du roi, à des niveaux inférieurs. L'aspect « bureaucratique » du système est donc limité, sans être inexistant.
Le personnage principal est le « préfet » (ougaritique sākinu), ou plus précisément le « préfet d'Ougarit » ou « préfet du Palais », car plusieurs personnes situées à des échelons inférieurs de l'appareil administratif portent également ce titre générique (qui signifie quelque chose comme « préposé »). Il dispose de son propre bureau, désigné suivant la conception de l'époque comme la « Maison du préfet », avec un personnel important. Son rôle est d'assister le roi, donc il peut intervenir aussi bien dans des affaires politiques, judiciaires ou commerciales, y compris en liaison avec les royaumes voisins. Il devient le dirigeant de fait du royaume lorsque le roi quitte ses frontières, ou bien lorsqu'il est trop jeune pour exercer le pouvoir. La reine dispose également de préfets attachés à sa maison.
Le caractère patrimonial de l'exercice du pouvoir et l'importance des « maisons » dans l'administration du royaume se voit dans les grandes résidences de la ville d'Ougarit et leurs archives (Maisons de Yabninou, de Rasapabou, de Rapanou, d'Ourtenou). Les personnages de haut rang qui y ont leur résidence et leur bureau sont liés au roi ou à sa famille, et impliqués en particulier dans leurs affaires économiques, ce qui explique qu'on ait pu y trouver des documents de nature « publique » aux côtés d'autres qui relèvent des affaires privées de ces personnages. Ainsi la Maison d'Ourtenou a livré des tablettes enregistrant les rations des chevaux et ânes du roi et de la reine, des lettres adressées au roi et au préfet, y compris par des rois étrangers, et d'une manière générale une correspondance relative au commerce. Cela indique que les affaires du royaume peuvent être gérées en dehors du palais, et qu'il n'y a pas de coupure nette entre le public et le privé.

Les dons royaux occupent une place importante parmi la documentation officielle, et jouent un rôle important dans l'administration des ressources du royaume ainsi que le lien entre le roi et ses fidèles. Le souverain transfère un domaine d'une personne à une autre, parfois un village entier, souvent avec des exemptions de contributions, en précisant à plusieurs reprises que les successeurs du bénéficiaire pourront en hériter. Il peut s'agir de libéralités à proprement parler, sans obligations (notamment des récompenses pour service rendu), mais aussi de concessions de tenures en échange d'un service (notamment parce que leur ancien détenteur est défaillant, en fuite ou mort sans héritier), pratique courante dans les royaumes de la période, ou des échanges de terres. Parfois le roi reçoit de l'argent, mais ce n'est pas forcément à interpréter comme un paiement donc la preuve qu'il s'agisse d'une vente. Le problème est notamment de savoir si le roi est ou non le détenteur d’une propriété éminente sur toutes les terres du royaume, qu’il octroierait à sa guise, ou bien si les dons royaux ne concernent qu'une catégorie de terres dépendant de la couronne. Dans ce cadre, la nature des services dus au roi par ses sujets, dans le cadre du système appelé pilku, est également discutée. Surtout attestés dans le cas des textes de donations, qui précisent si la terre est liée à un service ou pas, ou encore s'il y a des exemptions, ils peuvent être de nature militaire mais sont également de type civil, concernant notamment des artisans.
L'administration (ainsi que l'armée) est également divisée en sections ayant un chef appelé rabu (« grand »), identifié par son domaine de compétence (« chef comptable », « chef des artisans », « chef des chariots », « chef des champs », « chef du quai », etc.). Les prêtres font également partie du système administratif du royaume, et c'est pour cette raison qu'ils sont recensés dans des listes de personnes comme les autres serviteurs du Palais.
Des représentants du pouvoir royal sont placés au niveau local. Les préfets de rang inférieur sont en poste dans des localités du royaume (au moins huit) où ils doivent disposer de prérogatives similaires au préfet du Palais, mais circonscrites à l'échelle locale. Des « maires » se trouvent aussi au niveau local (on en connait pour la ville d'Ougarit et celle de Shalmiya, au nord du royaume), où ils coexistent avec des conseils d'« Anciens » représentant les communautés villageoises. Quand des villages entiers, ou leurs revenus, sont concédés à un serviteur du roi par des dons royaux, cela crée une autre forme de pouvoir local, un échelon intermédiaire entre les foyers villageois et le pouvoir royal. L'administration royale est aussi présente dans l'espace rural par les domaines agricoles dépendant directement du palais (voir plus bas) et aux frontières par des collecteurs de taxes.
Les activités administratives, et plus généralement économiques et juridiques, se repèrent également par la trouvaille de nombreux sceaux-cylindres servant à authentifier les actes, ceux de l'administration royale se caractérisant par le fait qu'ils portent des inscriptions identifiant leur possesseur, alors que la majorité de ces objets provenant d'Ougarit ne sont pas inscrits.

La domination hittite
Pour la période couverte par les lots d'archives, le roi d'Ougarit est un vassal du puissant roi des Hittites ; suivant la terminologie de l'époque, renvoyant à la métaphore familiale, le premier est le « fils » du second, qui est donc le « père ». Cette situation est instaurée à l'époque des conquêtes syriennes de Suppiluliuma Ier, dans la seconde moitié du XIVe siècle av. J.-C. Jusqu'alors vassal de l’Égypte mais au contact direct de la sphère de domination hittite, Niqmaddou finit par rejoindre cette dernière en raison de l'irrésistible expansion qu'elle connaît alors. Comme il est de mise avec les Hittites, la relation avec eux est formalisée par un traité international qui prévoit les conditions de la mise en vassalité d'Ougarit : il doit une complète loyauté à son suzerain, lui verse un tribut régulier, en échange de quoi sa sécurité est assurée. Il est aussi attendu que les rois d'Ougarit viennent rendre hommage régulièrement au roi hittite. Cela n'empêche pas Ar-halba de rejoindre une insurrection de rois syriens contre le second successeur de Suppiluliuma, son fils Mursili II, qui se solde par un triomphe hittite et un changement forcé de régime à Ougarit, où Niqmepa est intronisé et conclut un nouveau traité. La domination hittite sur la Syrie s'exerce alors principalement par l'intermédiaire d'une dynastie collatérale hittite, fondée à Karkemish par un autre fils de Suppiluliuma. C'est avec ces « vices-rois » hittites que les rois d'Ougarit doivent composer en premier lieu, et ils ont des représentants permanents à Karkemish. Le renforcement de l'emprise hittite sur Ougarit se traduit par la perte pour celle-ci de la domination qu'elle exerçait sur le petit royaume de Siyannou et d'Oushnatou, qui passe sous la domination directe de Karkemish. La relation est documentée par la correspondance entre le roi et d'autres personnages importants d'Ougarit et le grand roi hittite et ses représentants (roi de Karkemish, princes hittites, autres membres de la cour hittite), ainsi que des décrets et jugements promulgués par le grand roi hittite ou le roi de Karkemish. Ils se rapportent : à des litiges frontaliers, notamment le difficile tracé de la frontière avec Siyannou et Oushnatou ; des affaires judiciaires impliquant des ressortissants d'Ougarit et ceux d'autres pays sous domination hittite, ce qui concerne surtout des marchands, ou encore les affaires de divorce des rois d'Ougarit (étant donné que leurs reines sont d'origine étrangère, une étant même hittite) ; le service militaire dû par Ougarit, dont on sait par ailleurs qu'il a participé à la fameuse bataille de Qadesh du côté hittite, qui implique aussi à la fin de la période documentée l'envoi de bateaux préparés pour la guerre ; l'accueil de membres de la cour hittite à Ougarit, où rien ne doit leur être refusé ; ou encore des « présents » que le grand roi hittite et d'autres hauts personnages de son entourage exigent. De lourdes contraintes pèsent donc sur le roi d'Ougarit qui semble disposer de peu de marges de manœuvres pour conduire sa politique internationale, mais ses rapports avec les autres royaumes de second rang indiquent qu'il conserve une certaine marge d'action.

Les relations avec les autres royaumes
Malgré l'emprise hittite, les rois d'Ougarit continuent d'avoir des relations avec les autres royaumes de leur voisinage, et parfois plus loin encore. Cela concerne d'abord les autres pays soumis à la domination hittite : le voisin méridional et ancien vassal Siyannou et Oushnatou, avec lequel les interactions sont courantes ; l'Amurru avec lequel des liens matrimoniaux sont noués, même si le mariage d'une princesse de ce pays avec le roi Ammistamrou se termine mal comme évoqué précédemment ;  des lettres attestent aussi de relations régulières avec les cours de Qadesh et d'Alalakh ; Emar apparaît surtout dans le cadre des affaires commerciales de la Maison d'Ourtenou. La cour ougaritaine se tient en particulier au fait des conflits qui ont lieu en Haute Mésopotamie entre les Hittites et les Assyriens, qui tournent alors à l'avantage des seconds, dans lesquels elle est impliquée au même titre que les vassaux hittites. À la fin de la période documentée par les archives le royaume d'Alashiya, sur Chypre, devient vassal des Hittites et des lettres montrent que la cour ougaritaine a des relations avec lui, qui ont notamment trait à la présence de maraudeurs sur les mers (des prémices des attaques des « Peuples de la mer » ?).
Depuis la conclusion de la paix entre Ramsès II et Hattusili III les relations sont pacifiques entre les sphères hittites et égyptiennes. Des lettres sont échangées avec le pharaon Mérenptah. Plus important, les royaumes vassaux de l’Égypte comprennent les ports de la côté levantine avec lesquels Ougarit a des rapports commerciaux réguliers : Byblos, Beyrouth, Tyr, Sidon, Acre, Ashdod, Ashkelon. Les lettres échangées avec ces pays ont surtout trait au commerce et à des affaires diverses liées à des ressortissants d'Ougarit implantés dans ces pays. Ainsi un groupe d'Ougaritains installés à Sidon y commet un sacrilège dans le temple de la principale divinité de la cité, le Dieu de l'Orage local, qui doit être réparé par un rite long et coûteux. Ils doivent donc offrir une compensation financière, faute de quoi ils sont passibles de la peine de mort.

L'armée
Le royaume d'Ougarit doit composer avec un environnement politique marqué par les rivalités entre grandes puissances, et il dispose de sa propre armée pour assurer sa sécurité et aussi sa place au sein du système politique et militaire hittite. Le roi est en principe le commandant en chef des armées. La force de frappe principale des armées du Bronze récent sont les chars de combat, tirés par une paire de chevaux et avec un équipage de deux ou trois hommes, dont un maryannu, groupe qui constitue l'élite militaire. Les unités d'infanterie (armées d'arc et de lances, aussi d'épées courbes du type khépesh) constituent le gros des troupes. Une infanterie lourde existe peut-être, si on en juge par des textes administratifs enregistrant des cuirasses et des heaumes. Des garnisons sont stationnées dans les points stratégiques du royaume, les unités de chars et celles assurant la garde du roi devant être des troupes permanentes, éventuellement complétées par des mercenaires. Les localités doivent fournir des soldats lors des levées de troupes, qui accomplissent un service militaire temporaire. Il a été estimé qu'en tout le royaume pourrait mobiliser autour de 4 000-5 000 hommes, mais cela reste incertain. Il n'y a aucune indication qu'Ougarit ait disposé d'une flotte de guerre à proprement parler, comme on s'y attendrait pour ce royaume littoral. Aucun texte ne fournit d'indication sur la manière dont est organisée la flotte, ou quels types de bateaux elle emploie. Les navires utilisés lors des guerres sont manifestement ceux qui servent au transport de personnes et de biens en temps de paix.

Société et économie
Démographie
Plusieurs études, notamment celles conduites par M. Heltzer puis M. Liverani, se sont appuyées sur les tablettes recensant les villages du royaume d'Ougarit et leurs habitants, de manière à estimer le nombre d'habitants du royaume, en extrapolant à partir de données constatées pour d'autres corpus de textes de l'époque, en premier lieu celui du pays voisin d'Alalakh. Cela repose notamment sur l'estimation du nombre de villages du royaume, qui serait situé entre 150 et 200, puis la population moyenne de ces habitats est estimé de manière différente selon les auteurs, qui tombent quoi qu'il en soit sur un même ordre de grandeur, de 25-26 000 habitants pour la population villageoise. La population de la capitale Ougarit est estimé autour de 6 000 à 8 000 habitants, ce qui donnerait une population totale d'environ 31 à 34 000 personnes. J. Vidal a proposé une estimation plus basse, de 17-22 000 habitants. Ces estimations sont très incertaines car il n'y a pas de données complètes sur les agglomérations ougaritiques et peu de moyens d'estimer la taille moyenne d'un foyer. Au demeurant elles ne s'appuient pas sur des données archéologiques pour l'estimation de la population villageoise. La répartition du peuplement dans le royaume semble très inégalitaire et déterminée de manière assez classique par la topographie et les potentialités des terroirs : les plaines côtières les plus fertiles, autour d'Ougarit et dans la plaine de Jablé, sont les deux principaux foyers de peuplement, tandis que les régions hautes de l'intérieur sont moins peuplées.

Groupes sociaux
La société ougaritique est dominée par la famille royale. Vient après l'élite, constituée des plus proches serviteurs du roi et de la reine, c'est-à-dire les plus hauts fonctionnaires du royaume tels que le préfet et les détenteurs des charges administratives majeures, les riches marchands travaillant pour le compte de la famille royale tels que Shipti-Baal (qui plus est gendre du roi), ou encore les personnages dont les activités sont documentées par les archives des grandes résidences (Yabninou, Ourtenou, etc.) et ceux qui se voient concéder des domaines importants par le roi. Les fouilles des résidences confirment du reste ces écarts de richesse : les maisons de l'élite sont plus grandes, celles des grands serviteurs sont situées à proximité directe du palais royal, le matériel archéologique qu'elles ont livré est plus riche, se rapproche de celui du palais par la présence d'objets de prestige et exotiques, et le fait qu'on y pratique l'écriture.
Les hommes et femmes libres d'Ougarit sont désignés par l'expression générale « fils/filles d'Ougarit ». À ce titre, les femmes, tout en étant soumises aux hommes de leur famille (père ou époux, voire un frère) suivant les principes patriarcaux, disposent de droits et bénéficient d'une protection assez large pour une société antique, puisqu'elles peuvent ester en justice, posséder des terres, semblent avoir des droits d'héritage, peuvent faire des achats et des prêts, sont redevables du service royal. Mais elles ne peuvent apparemment pas occuper un poste dans l'administration.
La population d'Ougarit semble majoritairement de langue ougaritaine, donc de type « ouest-sémitique », les prénoms qu'ils portent étant surtout dans cette langue. Le fait que de nombreux noms soient en hourrite et que la langue hourrite soit écrite sur place, notamment dans la forme alphabétique qui ne sert pas à noter cette langue ailleurs, pourrait indiquer qu'une partie de la population d'Ougarit est de langue hourrite. Mais cela est débattu.
Les gens libres d'origine étrangère et résidant à Ougarit ne sont pas inclus dans le groupe des « fils/filles d'Ougarit », mais ils disposent de droits et de devoirs larges puisqu'ils peuvent avoir des terres dans le royaume, et être redevables du service royal. Parmi les étrangers résidant en permanence dans le royaume, ou présents de façon temporaire, on trouve des gens originaires du pays hittite, comme les marchands venus des ports d'Ura et de Kutupa. Les gens d'Alashiya (Chypre) sont également présents, dont certains sont des artisans travaillant pour le compte du palais. On trouve aussi des gens originaires des villes du littoral levantin situées au sud d'Ougarit (Tyr, Byblos, Sidon, Ashdod, etc.) et des Égyptiens. Ce cosmopolitisme ressort également dans les trouvailles effectuées dans les espaces résidentiels, qui ont fourni des objets provenant de divers horizons géographiques, plus que dans les sites syriens de l'intérieur pour la même période, sans que cela n'indique clairement où vivent les étrangers.
D'autres groupes d'origine extérieure, mais sans attache géographique précise, apparaissent aussi dans les textes d'Ougarit. Il s'agit notamment des hapiru, catégorie sociale attestée à plusieurs reprises dans les pays levantins du Bronze récent, qui désigne des groupes de déracinés, se déplaçant de manière plus ou moins organisée, dont certains ont tendance à causer des troubles dans les pays où ils vont, alors que d'autres s'y intègrent, ce qui semble être le cas de ceux documentés dans les textes administratifs d'Ougarit. D'autres groupes nomades dont l'identité est moins bien comprises apparaissent dans des textes. Il est aussi possible qu'Ougarit ait accueilli des Shardanes, qui font par la suite partie du groupe des « Peuples de la mer ». Le royaume doit également composer avec le problème des fugitifs, aussi bien les siens que ceux des autres royaumes qui se sont rendus sur son territoire, et cette question est souvent abordée dans les traités internationaux. Cela pose notamment problème parce qu'un fugitif n'accomplit plus le service qu'il doit à son roi.
La société ougaritique comprend également des esclaves, qui apparaissent parmi les listes de propriété, font l'objet de ventes, de dons, de legs. Les esclaves du palais travaillent notamment dans les domaines agricoles. Cela reflète pour partie un phénomène de déclassement social, puisque l'esclavage pour dettes est pratiqué à Ougarit. Dans ces cas il est possible de racheter sa liberté. Cela est également possible quand une personne est devenue esclave en étant capturée, auquel cas elle peut être libérée par le paiement d'une rançon. Les maîtres peuvent également décider d'affranchir un esclave. Cela arrive notamment quand des femmes esclaves se marient.

Vie familiale
Les structures familiales d'Ougarit peuvent être approchées par les textes et les analyses des espaces résidentiels, mais il est impossible d'en tirer des conclusions assurées. Il y a ainsi eu des tentatives de déterminer combien d'habitants vivaient dans une résidence, sur la base d'une moyenne théorique d'un habitant pour 10 m2 d'espace habitable, une moyenne de 5-6 personnes par foyer a pu être avancée, mais cela reste très approximatif. Le fait que les résidences soient de tailles différentes incite sans doute à envisager des situations différentes : dans certains cas des familles nucléaires (un couple et ses enfants), dans d'autres des familles élargies (un couple de parents avec un ou deux fils et leur(s) épouse(s) et enfants) et la possibilité de la polygamie doit aussi être prise en considération, ainsi que celle d'un nombre plus ou moins important de serviteurs avec potentiellement leur propre famille.
La société ougaritique suit le système patriarcal : le maître de maison est le père de famille, propriétaire de son patrimoine, il exerce son autorité sur sa ou se(s) épouse(s), leurs enfants, sa ou ses belle(s)-fille(s) vivant sous son toit, et ses serviteurs. Un texte indique qu'un père peut vendre son fils, mais on ne connaît pas les circonstances ayant conduit à cette situation. Dans d'autres situations, connues par des textes d'adoption, une personne peut être chassée de sa famille : si un fils adoptif maltraite sa mère, si un adopté rejette son adoptant. La sortie de la famille s'accompagne de gestes symboliques, du départ de la maison, et de la perte des droits sur le patrimoine familial.
Le mariage et ses principes sont documentés par des textes divers : certes aucun contrat de mariage n'a été mis au jour, mais le texte mythologique relatant l'union des divinités lunaires Yarikh et Ninkal fournit des informations sur les rites nuptiaux, les deux cas de divorces royaux donnent en filigrane des informations sur les aspects légaux du mariage et les données des autres sites syriens de la même période (Alalakh et Emar) permettent de compléter le tableau. Le mariage est arrangé entre deux familles, et se présente en fin de compte comme un accord entre le père de la mariée et son futur gendre, auquel il donne sa fille, puisqu'en général celle-ci va vivre dans le foyer de son époux. Elle est accompagnée d'une dot, et le père reçoit un présent de la part de son gendre (le soi-disant « prix de la mariée »), qui semble être ensuite donné à l'épouse. La cérémonie de mariage est marquée par un geste rituel dans lequel l'époux oint son épouse avec de l'huile. La polygamie est pratiquée, sans doute plutôt dans les familles les plus riches et/ou quand l'union avec la première épouse n'a pas été fertile. L'union peut être rompue par un divorce ou une répudiation, situation surtout attestée dans le cas des divorces royaux. On y apprend que l'épouse repart avec les biens qu'elle a apportés lors du mariage (sa dot) mais qu'elle laisse ce qu'elle a acquis depuis.

En cas d'infertilité du couple, ou plus généralement d'absence d'héritier, l'adoption est un recours possible. Néanmoins toutes les adoptions ne sont pas faites par des couples sans enfants, ce qui indique qu'elles interviennent pour répondre à des circonstances et des objectifs patrimoniaux variés, en lien avec la succession ou pas.
Le patrimoine familial comprend notamment des propriétés « privées », acquises par héritage, achat, mariage, adoption, ou encore don royal. Il comprend également les terres concédées par le palais et les obligations de service qui vont avec, qui se transmettent entre les générations de la famille. Plus généralement les métiers et fonctions administratives se transmettent couramment de père en fils.
La famille est également une unité religieuse, au sein de laquelle le chef de maison organise des cultes domestiques et familiaux. Le culte des ancêtres de la famille, matérialisé par la présence de nombreuses sépultures sous les résidences, assure le lien entre les générations actuelles et celles du passé, qui continuent en quelque sorte de résider dans la maison familiale et participent à la protection du foyer. Des textes existent l'existence d'un « dieu du père », dont la nature exacte est débattue : il pourrait s'agit d'un dieu familial voire clanique, ou bien d'une référence au père ou à un ancêtre familial divinisé (un « divin père »).
Les études du mobilier des zones résidentielles donnent également des informations sur le niveau de vie matériel des familles de la société d'Ougarit et divers aspects de leur quotidien. Les objets utilitaires constituent la majorité des trouvailles : contenants destinés au stockage des denrées, à la cuisson des aliments, objets servant pour la mouture des denrées alimentaires (grains, olives), le tissage domestique (fusaïoles, pesons), l'agriculture (faucilles). Il y a en revanche peu d'objets personnels tels que les sceaux ou bijoux ou portant des inscriptions. Sans surprise le mobilier de luxe et exotique se retrouve plus dans les résidences riches : la maison d'Ourtenou, où se pratiquait le négoce international, a ainsi livré une série de grands cratères en céramique peinte de Méditerranée orientale, dont certains peints de scènes de chars, type de représentation courante chez l'élite de la période. Les objets égyptiens se retrouvent également de façon privilégiée dans les demeures cossues.

Agriculture et élevage
L'activité principale d'Ougarit était l'agriculture. Les textes mythologiques renvoient souvent aux réalités agricoles d'Ougarit, notamment son climat et l'organisation de son terroir.
Le territoire du royaume comprend dans ses vallées de très bons terroirs agricole, propice à la culture de la « trilogie méditerranéenne » : céréales, vigne et oliviers. Le climat est de type méditerranéen, c'est-à-dire qu'il est caractérisé par des températures douces sans écarts marqués durant l'année, des étés secs avec des précipitations concentrées sur l'automne et l'hiver, souvent durant des épisodes violents, avec de grandes variations entre les années qui exposent le royaume à des périodes de sécheresse qui durent parfois plusieurs années. Les montagnes qui bordent le royaume assurent une certaine protection contre les vents secs et comprennent des zones de maquis (avec des pistachiers, des lentisques) et de forêts boisées (cèdres, pins, chênes) aisément accessibles. Les cours d'eau sont pour la plupart courts et à sec une partie de l'année, ils permettent au moins une irrigation durant quelques mois, mais les précipitations sont en général suffisantes pour permettre la mise en culture des campagnes.
Les textes administratifs, notamment les listes de villages et de contribuables, indiquent que les scribes ougaritains divisaient l'arrière-pays en deux grandes catégories : une zone « naturelle », non cultivée, comprenant notamment les forêts, situées en particulier dans les terres hautes, et aussi des espaces de pâtures, ainsi que des terrains de chasse et de cueillette ; une zone de culture, celle où se déroule l'activité agricole, elle-même divisée entre les « champs secs », c'est-à-dire ceux où l'apport en eau se fait naturellement, par les précipitations, et les « champs de source », c'est-à-dire ceux qui sont irrigués à partir de cours d'eau. Les terres irriguées comprennent les terroirs cultivés de façon plus intensive, situés aux abords des agglomérations et dans les vallées des principaux cours d'eau (donc autour d'Ougarit et au sud du royaume), comprenant notamment les jardins et vergers, les oliveraies et les vignes. Les zones d'agriculture sèche semblent plus tournées vers les cultures céréalières. Les piémonts et zones de montagnes sont plus consacrés à l'élevage. Il est à noter que les fouilles de la ville d'Ougarit ont montré que certains de ses habitants exerçaient une activité agricole (présence de silos, de faucilles, de presses à huile, d'étables et d'abreuvoirs à bétail) : tous les paysans du royaume ne sont donc pas des ruraux.
Le territoire d'Ougarit comprend aussi des salines. Le sel est une denrée importante, avant tout pour la conservation des aliments mais aussi pour des usages thérapeutiques et religieux. Les documents administratifs indiquent que le palais royal en contrôlait une grande quantité.

Les animaux dont les restes osseux ont été trouvés lors de fouilles sont essentiellement domestiques et abattus pour leur viande : les moutons, les chèvres et les bovins sont l'essentiel de l'alimentation carnée, tandis que les cochons sont complètement absents. La chasse complétait les besoins en produits animaux, alimentaires ou autres, notamment les sangliers et les cervidés, et d'autres restes d'animaux sauvages sont attestés (lions, ours, mangoustes, blaireaux, hippopotames). Étrangement les restes de poissons et coquillages sont peu nombreux malgré la proximité de la mer, et les textes ne documentent quasiment pas la pêche. Les chiens semblent rares. Des équidés, ânes et chevaux, sont élevés, mais moins nombreux. Ils servent pour le bât, le trait et la monte.
Le cheval en particulier a fait l'objet de grandes attentions. Il est devenu au Bronze récent un animal noble très apprécié des élites (c'est la « Mercedes » de la période selon D. Pardee), avant tout pour ses usages guerriers, aussi la chasse et l'apparat, comme l'indiquent les représentations artistiques. Le grand intérêt que porte l'élite à ces animaux se voit également par la découverte de textes thérapeutiques hippiatriques en ougaritique prodiguent des conseils sur les soins à donner aux chevaux.
La nature des structures agraires du royaume d'Ougarit reste discutée. Selon l'approche dite des « deux secteurs », les terres agricoles seraient réparties entre celle du palais exploitées par les dépendants de celui-ci et terres des communautés paysannes exploitées en commun par des paysans autonomes. Mais la documentation ne permet pas d'en être sûr, et d'autres interprétations sont possibles. L'approche patrimoniale-domestique considère que l'économie est organisée autour de « maisons » ayant leurs domaines agricoles (avec des terres, des troupeaux, du personnel et des moyens matériels d'exploitation), fonctionnant suivant un même principe mais à des échelles très différentes, et liées par des relations hiérarchiques. La plus importante est celle du roi (le « Palais ») et le bas de l'échelle est occupé par celles des exploitants agricoles, avec entre les deux les possesseurs de domaines villageois, qui sont au service du premier et gèrent le travail des seconds (et leur taxation). De fait, on retrouve au moins dans le cadre palatial un système attesté ailleurs pour la même période : le roi concède des terres à des personnages, souvent de rang important, en échange de l'exercice d'une fonction ou d'une compensation financière, ou en récompense pour services rendus, et ceux-ci les font exploiter par des ouvriers agricoles contre rémunération. Les domaines agricoles dépendant du palais sont souvent dénommés par le terme ougaritique gt (gittu ?), qui semble désigner à l'origine une presse à huile, ou le terme akkadien dimtu, qui désigne à l'origine une « tour » ou plus généralement un établissement fortifié. Il s'agit donc manifestement d'une référence au centre de l'exploitation agricole (une ferme fortifiée ?) qui désigne par extension le domaine. Ces unités économiques sont identifiées par un nom géographique (« tour de tel lieu ») ou un nom de personne (« tour de untel »). Elles disposent de terres de diverses natures et emploient du personnel dépendant du palais (dont des esclaves) ou devant accomplir un service temporaire pour le compte de celui-ci (qui implique souvent qu'ils amènent leur bétail pour aider aux travaux des champs), rémunéré par des rations d'entretien (une sorte de salaire en nature).

Activités artisanales
L'activité artisanale est documentée dans le cadre du palais, les artisans étant alors des spécialistes travaillant au titre du service dû au roi (pilku), qu'il soit permanent ou temporaire. Quoi qu'il en soit on retrouve un système attesté dans les autres royaumes de la période : les artisans reçoivent des magasins du palais les matières premières nécessaires aux tâches qui leur sont confiées, ainsi que des rations d'entretien, et dans certains cas ils bénéficient de terres de service. L'encadrement administratif est exercé comme pour les autres activités par des chefs des artisans, relayés par des sous-chefs encadrant les artisans en fonction de leurs spécialités. Les textes mentionnent également des apprentis et les métiers semblent souvent s'exercer de père en fils.
Les textes administratifs permettent d'avoir un aperçu de la diversité des métiers artisanaux exercés à Ougarit, sans en dire beaucoup plus sur leur fonctionnement. Les restes matériels mis au jour lors des fouilles complètent les informations pour les productions en matériaux non périssables (pierre, métal, céramique, ivoire), en revanche il est souvent difficile d'identifier clairement des ateliers. Il ne semble pas y avoir eu de quartiers spécialisés dans une production artisanale, plutôt des ateliers dispersés, situés au rez-de-chaussée de résidences. Du reste il peut être difficile de distinguer les lieux où l'artisanat est de type domestique, réalisé pour les seuls besoins de la maisonnée, et celui où il est de type professionnel, destiné à une activité économique. Les activités polluantes et nécessitant beaucoup d'eau (potiers, tanneurs, fondeurs, etc.) doivent être reléguées en périphérie du site. Aucune trace d'atelier n'a été identifiée dans le palais royal d'Ougarit, en revanche le palais nord de Ras Inb Hani disposait d'espaces artisanaux : travail des pierres dures, fabrication de mobilier, fonderie.
Les textes fournissent par exemple des précisions sur les métiers textiles, qui travaillaient avant tout le lin et la laine : on y rencontre des spécialistes des différentes étapes de la production d'étoffes (filage, tissage, foulage), de la confection de vêtements pour les humains et aussi pour les chevaux (des sortes de caparaçons), des tondeurs, des mégissiers. On sait aussi que des étoffes étaient teintes, Ougarit et Minet el-Beidha ayant livré de nombreuses coquilles de murex, mollusque qui sert pour la teinture pourpre. Les données des textes sont aussi complétées par des découvertes d'objets servant à la production textile (fuseaux et fusaïoles), dans un cadre domestique (c'est probablement une activité féminine), quelques empreintes de textiles sur des briques ou poteries, et aussi par des représentations artistiques de vêtements.
Les spécialistes de la taille des pierres comprennent les sculpteurs et les lapicides, qui sont notamment spécialisés dans la fabrication des sceaux, ainsi que des experts du travail des pierres semi-précieuses comme les graveurs et polisseurs, ou encore des spécialistes du travail du lapis-lazuli. Les fouilles archéologiques ont livré des objets en os et en ivoire sculptés, la période voyant en particulier l'essor de l'art des ivoiriers, qui fabriquaient pour les élites des éléments de meubles, des boites à fard et pyxides, des peignes, des fuseaux, etc. La présence de nombreuses chutes et pièces mises au rebut dans le palais nord Ras Ibn Hani indique qu'un atelier y travaillait se matériau. Le travail du bois se faisait probablement suivant des modalités similaires, mais ses productions n'ont pas été préservées.
Le travail du métal est souvent documenté, par des livraisons de matières premières (or, argent, cuivre, étain, fer) et les noms de spécialistes : on trouve des fondeurs/forgerons, des spécialistes du cuivre et des métaux précieux, des orfèvres, etc. Les fabricants de certaines armes (pointes de flèches, épées) sont également des spécialistes de métallurgie. Les fouilles ont livré des moules à outils métalliques et à bijoux, et diverses autres traces de production métallurgique (tuyères, soufflets, creusets, scories, etc.), mais la seule aire de production métallurgique identifiée lors de fouilles est celle du palais nord de Ras Ibn Hani. Ce site a également livré de grandes quantités de plomb. Les fouilles ont également révélé le fait que la production et l'emploi du silex reste très important au Bronze récent pour façonner des outils (notamment des faucilles), même plusieurs siècles après l'apparition des outils en métal.

Les potiers sont également évoqués dans des textes. En revanche aucun atelier de poterie n'a été mis au jour, même si une grande quantité de poteries locales documente ce secteur d'activité. Il s'agit pour l'essentiel d'une production de masse de qualité fruste servant aux besoins quotidiens de la population (jarres de stockage, marmites de cuisson, cruches à boissons, lampes à huile), même si une production plus raffinée de céramique peinte existe aussi.

Commerce et échanges
La documentation d'Ougarit fournit des informations importantes sur les échanges de biens à longue distance à l'âge du bronze récent. Cette période a vu un développement important des réseaux diplomatiques et commerciaux, qui relient les régions du Proche-Orient et de la Méditerranée orientale et créent un monde plus connecté que par le passé, au moins pour le milieu des élites et ceux qui fabriquent et échangent pour leur compte des biens de prestige. En particulier, le développement des échanges maritimes est un phénomène majeur de la période.

Dans ce contexte, le royaume d'Ougarit dispose d'une position géographique privilégiée pour les échanges maritimes, car il dispose du seul port important du littoral nord de la Syrie, entre Byblos et la Cilicie, donc de la Syrie hittite, qui plus est proche de Chypre qui occupe une part importante dans les échanges durant cette période. Le site portuaire est situé sur la baie à un kilomètre à peine d'Ougarit, à Minet el-Beida, peut-être l'ancienne Mahadou : la capitale est donc visible depuis la mer (il a été proposé que les deux temples de l'acropole fonctionnent comme des points de repères). Les fouilles qui y ont eu lieu de 1929 à 1935 n'y ont pas dégagé des installations portuaires, en revanche des objets provenant de régions étrangères, ainsi qu'un entrepôt contenant 80 jarres documentent les activités commerciales. Les routes maritimes sont donc très importantes. Les textes et le matériel archéologique indiquent plusieurs des partenaires commerciaux maritimes d'Ougarit : ports de la côte cananéenne (Byblos, Tyr, Sidon, Ashdod, etc.), Chypre (Alashiya, qui fournit notamment du cuivre), Cilicie (Ura), Égypte, et plus loin le monde égéen c'est-à-dire la Crète (Keftiu dans les textes) et la Grèce continentale mycénienne, avec laquelle les relations ne sont documentées que par des trouvailles d'objets.
Il s'agit sans doute surtout d'un commerce de cabotage, reposant sur des voyages sur des distances courtes. Les bateaux de la période et leurs cargaisons sont documentés par deux épaves mises au jour le long des côtes turques, à Uluburun et au Cap Gelidonya. La place d'Ougarit dans les échanges est sans doute en grande partie liée à sa capacité à servir d'interface entre ces réseaux maritimes et ceux du commerce terrestre, notamment l'axe vers l'est qui remonte la vallée du Nahr el-Kebir pour rejoindre la Syrie centrale et par là la vallée de l'Euphrate, en particulier les cités d'Emar et de Karkemish, aussi Qadesh sur l'Oronte. Il s'agit d'un commerce de type caravanier, avec des ânes, puis fluvial sur l'Euphrate.
Les produits échangés sont très variés, et là encore documentés à la fois par les textes et l'archéologie. Il peut s'agir de métaux (notamment de lingots de cuivre et de plomb), du bois, de pierres dures telles que le lapis-lazuli, d'étoffes, d'épices, de vin, d'huile d'olive, d'objets en métal, en ivoire, en pierre, également des esclaves.

La documentation textuelle fournit des informations sur l'organisation des échanges. Elles proviennent essentiellement du palais ou de personnes qui sont au service du roi et de la reine, il en ressort l'image d'un commerce dominé par les intérêts du pouvoir royal même si celui-ci n'exerce probablement pas de monopole. Les archives de la maison d'Ourtenou documentent en particulier le commerce à longue distance avec Emar sur l'Euphrate, organisé comme une sorte de firme hiérarchisée, dominée par la figure de Shipti-Baal, fondé de pouvoir au service de la reine (et accessoirement gendre du couple royal), auquel participent également Ourtenou ainsi que d'autres partenaires et des représentants en poste dans plusieurs succursales situées sur les routes commerciales. Cette organisation est également impliquée dans le commerce maritime avec des cités de la côte (Tyr), Chypre et plus loin encore.
Ceux que les textes désignent comme des « marchands » (ougaritique mākiru ou makkāru, akkadien tamkāru) ont plus exactement le rôle d'intermédiaires ou de négociants. Ils réalisent des opérations d'achats ou de vente pour le compte du palais. Celui-ci peut notamment leur confier un capital financier ou des marchandises pour qu'ils accomplissent des opérations commerciales pour son compte, en contrôlant à son retour qu'il n'y ait pas eu de malversation. Le dénommé Sinaranou bénéficie ainsi des faveurs du roi Niqmepa et du prince Ammistamrou. Cela lui permet d'obtenir d'importants domaines au sud du royaume, et de bénéficier d'exemptions de taxes pour les cargaisons de ses bateaux, sauf s'ils viennent de Crète auquel cas il doit verser une gratification au roi.
Ce commerce fait l'objet d'une réglementation de la part du pouvoir hittite. Il s'agit notamment d'assurer la sécurité des routes, et de prévoir une indemnisation lorsque le marchand d'un royaume est attaqué dans un autre. Un décret est également pris par le roi hittite concernant les marchands d'Ura, cité de Cilicie, qui sont installés à Ougarit et y ont fait des prêts à des Ougaritains qui n'ont pas pu les rembourser.
La circulation des biens ne prend du reste pas forcément la forme d'un commerce avec un prix, car elle se réalise souvent dans un contexte politique et diplomatique : les différentes cours s'échangent des présents, qui sont souvent des produits de même nature que ceux qui se vendent sur les circuits commerciaux, et les pays vassaux doivent verser un tribut à leur suzerain. Ces biens de prestige manifestent l'appartenance à la communauté internationale de l'époque. Il est donc parfois difficile de savoir si un bien qui circule entre le palais d'Ougarit et celui d'un autre royaume le fait par des circuits commerciaux ou dans le cadre d'échanges diplomatiques.

Vie religieuse
Divinités et mythes
Le panthéon d'Ougarit repose sur des divinités issues du fond religieux de Syrie et du Levant. Le dieu qui occupe la position de souverain divin dans les textes religieux d'Ougarit est El (Ilu), dont le nom signifie littéralement « Dieu ». Il est considéré comme le père des dieux et comme un dieu créateur. L'autre dieu majeur est Baal, dont le nom signifie « le Seigneur » ou « le Maître », est en fait une épithète, qualifiant ici le dieu connu dans l'aire syro-levantine par le nom Haddu/Hadad. C'est le « dieu de l'Orage », c'est-à-dire celui qui maîtrise des phénomènes atmosphériques tels que la foudre et la pluie, et par extension celui qui assure la fertilité. Il réside sur le plus haut lieu du royaume, le mont Saphon, et a plus largement les caractéristiques d'une divinité souveraine. C'est dans cette position qu'il est le protagoniste du texte mythologique surnommé « Cycle de Baal ». Il y est présenté comme le fils du dieu Dagan, un des autres dieux majeurs de la Syrie antique. Les déesses les plus importantes du panthéon sont Athirat (Asherah), la parèdre d'El, Anat, la sœur de Baal, associée à l'amour et à la guerre, la déesse astrale Athtart (Astarté ; elle dispose d'une contrepartie masculine appelée Athtar). D'autres divinités majeures portent le nom de leur attribut principal : la déesse « Soleil » Shapash, le dieu « Lune » Yarikh(u), la « Mer » Yam(mu), le dieu infernal « Mort », Mot(u). Parmi les autres dieux majeurs : Kotar(u)-wa-hasis(u) est le dieu des artisans, Rashap est associé à la peste et aux épidémies. Des tablettes contenant des listes de divinités font connaître des dizaines d'autres dieux recevant un culte à Ougarit, dont des hypostases locales d'un même dieu, comme cela est courant dans un système polythéiste (par exemple Baal d'Ougarit et Baal du Saphon).
La mythologie ougaritique est connue par plusieurs textes écrits dans l'alphabet local. Le plus important est le « Cycle de Baal », sur six tablettes, dont un colophon indique que son scribe (auteur ?) est Ili-milkou, officiant sous le règne d'un des rois nommés Niqmaddou. C'est un ensemble de mythes de souveraineté, dans lesquels Baal doit affronter plusieurs adversaires pour affirmer sa suprématie : d'abord Yam(mu) la Mer, affrontement qui lui permet de devenir roi, après quoi suit un récit relatant la construction de son palais, puis une nouvelle lutte pour le pouvoir qui le met cette fois-ci en rivalité avec Mot(u) la Mort, qui s'avoue à son tour vaincu. Ces textes ont peut-être un usage rituel, étant déclamés lors de fêtes, et pourraient aussi avoir un lien avec le cycle agricole. Quelques autres mythes sont connus, dans des états divers, certains étant associés à des rites. Ainsi un court mythe relatant comment El est devenu ivre lors d'un banquet est accompagné au verso de la tablette d'une incantation qui semble destinée à guérir la gueule-de-bois.

Culte
Les deux temples principaux d'Ougarit, situés sur l'acropole, sont attribués à Baal et à Dagan selon l'interprétation la plus courante, reposant sur des inscriptions mises au jour sur place. H. Niehr considère plutôt que le second était dédié à El, et que cette zone servait plus largement de lieu de culte aux principales divinités locales, donc Asherah, Anat et Dagan. Les autres lieux de culte identifiés lors des fouilles sont le « temple hourrite » dans la zone palatiale et le « temple aux rhytons » du quartier résidentiel. Les textes indiquent la présence de temples hors de la capitale.
Les rituels documentés par des textes en langue ougaritique sont pour beaucoup relatifs aux rites sacrificiels du culte royal, au cours desquels le roi jouait le rôle principal en tant qu'intermédiaire entre les dieux et les hommes, et immolait un animal. Il était sans doute assisté par des prêtres, l'existence d'un clergé spécialisé étant documentée par plusieurs textes. Les rites les plus importants se déroulent sur plusieurs jours, lors de fêtes religieuses, sont accompagnés de processions, de libations, d'encens, de chants, de musique et de banquets.
Des particuliers pouvaient se réunir dans des associations cultuelles/confréries (qui se constituent peut-être en fonction de liens professionnels), appelées marzihu, sous l'égide d'une divinité, et procéder à des banquets et libations, en revanche apparemment pas de sacrifices. Un culte existait également dans le cadre domestique, attesté notamment par des figurines divines et amulettes mises au jour dans des habitations. Les particuliers vouaient également des offrandes aux dieux dans leurs temples ; par exemple des ancres ont été mises au jour dans le temple de Baal, en lien avec la sécurité lors des voyages en mer. Les pratiques de divination sont également documentées par des textes de présages de naissance et d'astrologie, ainsi que des maquettes de foies en terre cuite et en ivoire servant à l'hépatoscopie. Les pratiques magiques sont attestées par des recueils d'incantations, contre le mauvais œil, l'impuissance sexuelle et les serpents et scorpions dirigés par un sorcier.
Les découvertes de sépultures sous des maisons indiquent par ailleurs l'existence d'un culte des ancêtres dans un cadre familial, pratique courante dans le Proche-Orient antique. Les textes documentant cette activité se rapportent au culte dynastique : les rois décédés deviennent des divinités défuntes appelées rapi'ouma et reçoivent des offrandes.

Trouvailles artistiques
L'art de la Syrie de l'âge du Bronze récent s'inscrit dans la continuité des traditions antérieures, celles du Bronze ancien et moyen, mais durant la fin de la période des tendances s'affirment et apportent diverses innovations. Ces évolutions concernent l'élite palatiale et urbaine, laissant de côté la majorité de la population. D'un côté les spécificités régionales se font plus fortes, notamment dans l'architecture, la poterie et la glyptique, et de l'autre les productions de luxe destinées à une élite réduite reprennent des motifs d'un supposé « style international », qui reflète l'intensification des échanges de biens et d'idées entre les cours royales. Le développement de la technique de fabrication des matières vitreuses est mobilisé pour produire divers types d'objets. Tout cela se retrouve dans les divers types d'objets d'art mis au jour à Ougarit, qu'il s'agisse de productions locales ou d'importations, reflétant dans tous les cas les goûts et les attentes des élites locales. Les éléments égyptiens jouissent depuis longtemps d'une grande popularité au Levant, qui se confirme, mais la culture hittite fait également son intrusion en Syrie avec son emprise politique. À cela s'ajoutent les échanges croissants avec le monde égéen et la persistance de ceux avec le monde mésopotamien, qui font que les élites des centres urbains syriens tels qu'Ougarit sont marquées par une culture matérielle à la croisée de diverses traditions et influences.

Céramiques locales
La céramique produite à Ougarit est majoritairement une production grossière, sans décors, servant pour des usages utilitaires. Mais il existe aussi une céramique peinte de production locale. Les formes attestées en grand nombre sont les jarres, chopes, cratères ou des vases biconiques. La poterie peinte l'est généralement avec une seule couleur, choisie parmi une nuance de rouge ou de noir. Les motifs représentés sont en général de type géométrique (échelles, zigzags, treillis, triangles renversés, points, etc.) et parfois figurés, avec des représentations animales et humaines, et potentiellement quelques scènes mythologiques. Si le répertoire s'inspire d'un fonds syro-levantin, il y a néanmoins une certaine originalité dans le travail des potiers d'Ougarit. Il y a aussi des tentatives d'imiter les formes et motifs mycéniens, qui semblent plus populaires, sans originalité et parfois de manière maladroite.

Céramiques chypriotes et mycéniennes
Le répertoire de céramiques mis au jour à Ras Shamra et sur les sites voisins est marqué par la présence de céramiques importées de Chypre et de la Grèce mycénienne, trouvées aussi bien dans des résidences que des tombes. Il s'agit certes d'une petite proportion de l'ensemble des céramiques, l'immense majorité étant originaire de Syrie, mais il s'agit de produits de grande qualité technique et esthétique. La céramique fine chypriote du Bronze récent est façonnée à la main, d'une très grande qualité d'exécution. Les céramiques catégorisées comme « mycéniennes » proviennent pour partie de Grèce continentale ou d'îles égéennes, mais une autre est originaire de Chypre, où des artisans Mycéniens se sont peut-être installés. Il s'agit majoritairement de vases à boire ou à libations, employés comme vaisselle d'apparat ou lors de banquets et autres rituels, mais certains mis au jour avant tout dans les tombes semblent avoir la fonction d'offrandes funéraires. Les formes sont variées mais certains sont plus représentés : les hauts cratères « amphoroïdes » à col large peints de scènes de chars, surtout attestés dans les tombes, et les cratères « en cloche » à large ouverture sans col du « style rude », chypriote, décorés surtout de taureaux et d'oiseaux ; des grandes jarres à étrier crétoises peintes d'ondulations dérivées du motif du poulpe ; des rhytons coniques et d'autres zoomorphes, peut-être employés pour le culte ; divers types de récipients utilitaires peints, notamment des coupes à boire. Les récipients à petite ouverture, donc faciles à fermer, qu'il s'agisse de vases, jarres ou flacons, ont dû être importé pour leur contenant (huile d'olive, vin, huiles parfumées, opium).

Glyptique
La glyptique d'Ougarit est comme dans le Proche-Orient ancien tournée vers la gravure de sceaux-cylindres dont le déroulement sur de l'argile permet de représenter des scènes horizontales complexes. Les sceaux du Bronze moyen, généralement taillés dans de l'hématite, reprennent souvent les traditions nord-syriennes, sans doute grandement influencées par Alep, tandis que d'autres sont marqués par le style babylonien de la période (paléo-babylonien). Le sceau utilisé par les rois d'Ougarit dans les derniers temps du royaume remonte à cette époque et relève de la tradition babylonienne. Les sceaux-cylindres du Bronze récent renvoient aux différentes influences que connaît Ougarit à cette période. Des sceaux en faïence bleue, verte ou jaune sont de style mittanien, d'autres sont importés de Chypre. La production locale repose sur les styles syriens antérieurs et est très marquée par des influences égyptiennes, auxquelles se mêlent des modèles égéens, chypriotes, anatoliens. Elle représente des divinités et des scènes mythologiques, et renvoie aussi à l'iconographie du pouvoir et de la royauté, en reprenant par exemple le vieux motif du « maître des animaux ».

Sculpture sur pierre
Les artistes d'Ougarit ont une certaine prédilection pour les stèles sur pierre, dont un certain nombre ont été retrouvées, dont la plus célèbre est la Stèle du « Baal au foudre », aujourd'hui au Musée du Louvre. Assez peu de statues en ronde-bosse nous sont parvenues, l'exemple le plus remarquable étant la statue représentant le dieu El assis sur un trône, exécutée dans un style typiquement syrien, puisqu'elle rappelle des œuvres de même type provenant de Qatna. Tous ces objets de belle facture témoignent de l'existence d'une bonne école de sculpteurs sur pierre dans le royaume ougaritain.

Arts du métal
L'artisanat du métal est assez bien attesté à Ougarit. On a retrouvé des ateliers de métallurgistes et d'orfèvres, qui ont livré des moules, destinés à fabriquer des outils (haches, ciseaux, lames), ou bien des bijoux. On utilisait surtout le bronze, et également le fer, ainsi que des métaux plus précieux comme l'or pour les objets de luxe.
Parmi la production des métallurgistes d'Ougarit, on note la présence de nombreuses petites statuettes en bronze, finement exécutées, représentant des divinités en position assise ou debout. Certains objets de vaisselle de luxe font partie des plus beaux objets d'art retrouvés dans la ville. On a ainsi retrouvé deux coupes en or finement décorées près du temple de Baal, dont la « patère de la chasse », nommée ainsi parce qu'un de ses deux registres représente une chasse royale.

Ivoire
Les artisans ivoiriers d'Ougarit travaillaient l'ivoire d'hippopotame ainsi que celui d'éléphant, deux espèces qui vivaient encore en Syrie à l'âge du Bronze (même si le nombre d'éléphants est au mieux restreint), même s'il est possible qu'ils aient aussi employés des matériaux venus d’Égypte où ces animaux sont plus courant. Le goût pour le mobilier en ivoire est une des caractéristiques de l'élite et du style international de cette période, et les trouvailles d'Ougarit s'inscrivent très bien dans ce contexte. On sait par exemple que la dot que la reine Ahat-milkou amène depuis l'Amourrou comprend trois lits avec des incrustations en ivoire. L'une des œuvres les plus remarquables venant d'Ougarit est d’ailleurs un panneau de lit sculpté retrouvé dans le palais royal, représentant des scènes exaltant la figure royale : chasse, fête nuptiale avec une princesse, déesse nourrissant deux jeunes princes. La plupart des objets en ivoire proviennent d'un contexte funéraire et reflètent des usages plus domestiques, souvent féminins. Ils sont généralement de petite taille et assez finement exécutés : boîtes à fard, dont certaines en forme de canard, pyxides, peignes, fuseaux, que l'on rencontre dans d'autres sites levantins. Un des chefs-d'œuvre des ivoiriers ougaritains est la « dame aux bouquetins », sculptée en relief sur ce qui semble être le couvercle d'une pyxide. Elle représente une déesse de la fécondité nourrissant deux bouquetins avec des rameaux. L'ivoire est aussi employé pour fabriquer des éléments de parure, d'instruments de musique, des pièces de jeu, des figurines, etc..

Matières vitreuses
Des vases et autres objets réalisés en « faïence » (en réalité une pâte silicieuse glaçurée) se retrouvent à Ougarit comme dans tout le Levant de l'âge du bronze moyen et récent. Il s'agit souvent de céramiques d'un type assez luxueux, portant parfois des décors témoignant d'influences égyptiennes et égéennes.

Objets égyptiens et égyptisants
Ougarit dans le Proche-Orient ancien
Ougarit et les Phéniciens
La cité d'Ougarit de l'âge du bronze récent présente de nombreuses similitudes avec les cités phéniciennes de l'âge du fer : c'est un petit royaume, animé par un port marchand impliqué dans les échanges à longue distance sur la Méditerranée, qui a des relations économiques et culturelles avec de nombreuses régions (Chypre, Anatolie, Mésopotamie, Levant méridional, Égypte, monde égéen). En plus de cela sa culture, en particulier sa religion, présente de nombreux traits communs avec celle de la Phénicie. Pour autant, Ougarit n'est pas considérée comme une cité phénicienne : parce qu'elle est détruite à la fin de l'âge du bronze, elle n'existe plus au moment où les cités phéniciennes commencent leur expansion. Géographiquement, Ougarit est situé un peu plus au nord que la zone d'expansion de la culture phénicienne, qui s'arrête plutôt à Arwad, et remonte au moins jusqu'à la plaine de Jablé dans ses phases tardives (elle est attestée à Tell Toueini, Tell Soukas, Tell Siyannou). Chronologiquement, le début de la civilisation phénicienne est placé par convention au début du XIIe siècle av. J.-C., donc au moment où disparaît Ougarit. C'est certes un découpage par bien des aspects artificiels, puisque les cités motrices de la civilisation phénicienne, Tyr, Sidon, Byblos, Arwad et Beyrouth, sont déjà des ports dynamiques au Bronze récent et que les continuités culturelles entre les âges du bronze et du fer y sont très fortes. De ce fait Ougarit intéresse les études phéniciennes parce que ses textes fournissent des informations sur la situation des futures cités phéniciennes juste avant le début conventionnel de cette civilisation. La culture d'Ougarit est plus généralement très proche de celle de la Phénicie : l'alphabet ougaritique présente des liens avec celui de Phénicie, même si ce dernier n'en est pas un dérivé, les langues ougaritique et phénicienne présentent du reste de fortes similitudes, les cultes et les mythes ougaritiques tournent autour d'un monde divin similaire (mais pas identique) à celui des cités de Phénicie, les traditions artistiques sont également proches. Ougarit trouve donc une place dans les histoires de la Phénicie.

Ougarit et la Bible
De la même manière et plus encore, la documentation d'Ougarit a attiré l'attention des spécialistes des études bibliques. La religion ougaritique offre en effet une documentation sans équivalent pour étudier une religion locale appartenant (ou du moins fortement apparentée) au substrat « cananéen » polythéiste qui préfigure celui de l'ancien Israël, qui passe du polythéisme au monothéisme, évolution dont la Bible hébraïque témoigne. Les deux figures divines majeures d'Ougarit, El et Baal, présentent de nombreuses similitudes avec le Dieu (Yhwh) biblique. Les divinités Baal et Ashéra sont évoquées dans la Bible, en tant qu'idoles et donc objet d'opprobre de ses rédacteurs. Du point de vue poétique, des formulations similaires se retrouvent entre les mythes ougaritiques et les textes de la Bible hébraïque, dont les langues sont apparentées.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Introductions
(en) Wilfred H. van Soldt, « Ugarit: A Second-Millennium Kingdom on the Mediterranean Coast », dans Jack M. Sasson (dir.), Civilizations of the Ancient Near East, New York, Scribner, 1995, p. 1255-1266
(en) Marguerite Yon (trad. Nancy Leiwand), « Ugarit », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Near East, vol. 5, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 255-262
Le Monde de la Bible, no 120 « Le mystère Ougarit, 70e anniversaire de la découverte en Syrie », juillet-août 1999  (traduction en anglais : (en) « The Mysteries of Ugarit : History, Daily Life, Cult », Near Eastern Archaeology, vol. 63, no 4,‎ décembre 2000 (JSTOR i361134))
Dossiers d'archéologie, Hors série, no 10 « Ougarit, aux origines de l'alphabet », novembre 2004 
(en + de + fr) Wilfred H. van Soldt, Denis Pardee, Herbert Niehr et Marguerite Yon, « Ugarit », dans Reallexikon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. XIV, 2015, p. 280-295
(en) John Nicholas Postgate, Bronze Age Bureaucracy : Writing and the Practice of Government in Assyria, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2013

Catalogues d'expositions
Syrie : Mémoire et Civilisation, Paris, Flammarion et l'Institut du monde arabe, 1993, 487 p. (ISBN 2080124250)
Geneviève Galliano et Yves Calvet (dir.), Le royaume d'Ougarit : aux origines de l'alphabet, Paris et Lyon, Somogy éd. d'art et Musée des Beaux-Arts de Lyon, 2004
(en) Joan Aruz, Kim Benzel et Jean M. Evans (dir.), Beyond Babylon : Art, Trade, and Diplomacy in the Second Millennium B.C., New York, The Metropolitan Museum of New York, 2008
Valérie Matoïan et Thomas Römer (dir.), Ougarit : entre Orient et Occident, Paris, Collège de France – Mission archéologique syro-française de Ras Shamra – Ougarit, 2016

Études sur Ougarit
Mario Liverani, « Ras Shamra II. Histoire », Supplément au Dictionnaire de la Bible, vol. 9,‎ 1979, col. 1295-1348
Marguerite Yon, La cité d'Ougarit sur le tell de Ras Shamra, Paris, Éditions Recherches sur les civilisations, 1997 (traduction en anglais avec mise à jour : (en) Marguerite Yon, The City of Ugarit at Tell Ras Shamra, Winona Lake, Eisenbrauns, 2006)
(en) Wilfred G. E. Watson et Nicolas Wyatt (dir.), Handbook of Ugaritic studies, Leyde, Boston et Cologne, Brill, coll. « Handbuch der Orientalistik », 1999
(en) Juan-Pablo Vita, « The Society of Ugarit », dans Wilfred G. E. Watson et Nicholas Wyatt (dir.), Handbook of Ugaritic Studies, Louvain, Boston et Cologne, Peeters, coll. « Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta », 1999, p. 455-498
(en) J. David Schloen, The House of the Father as Fact and Symbol : Patrimonialism in Ugarit and the Ancient Near East, Winona Lake, Eisenbrauns, 2001
(en) Ignacio Márquez Rowe, « Ugarit », dans Raymond Westbrook (dir.), A History of Ancient Near Eastern Law, vol. 1, Leyde, Brill, coll. « Handbuch der Orientalistik », 2003, p. 719-735
Jacques Freu, Histoire politique du royaume d'Ugarit, Paris, L'Harmattan, coll. « Kubaba / Antiquité », 2006
Gabriel Saadé, Ougarit et son royaume : Des origines à sa destruction, Beyrouth, Institut Français du Proche-Orient, 2011

Recueils de textes antiques
André Caquot et Maurice Sznycer, « Les textes ougaritiques », dans René Labat, André Caquot, Maurice Sznycer et Maurice Vieyra, Les religions du Proche-Orient asiatique, Textes babyloniens, ougaritiques, hittites, Paris, Fayard, 1970, p. 353-458
André Caquot et Maurice Sznycer, Textes ougaritiques : t. 1 Mythes et légendes, Paris, Éditions du Cerf, coll. « Littératures anciennes du Proche-Orient », 1974
André Caquot, Jean-Michel de Tarragon et Jose Luis Cunchillos, Textes ougaritiques : t. 2 Textes religieux et rituels, correspondance, Paris, Éditions du Cerf, coll. « Littératures anciennes du Proche-Orient », 1989
Sylvie Lackenbacher, Textes akkadiens d'Ugarit, Paris, Éditions du Cerf, coll. « Littératures anciennes du Proche-Orient », 2002
(en) Simon B. Parker (dir.), Ugaritic Narrative Poetry, Atlanta, Society of the Biblical Literature, coll. « Writings from the Ancient World » (no 9), 1997
(en) Dennis Pardee, Ritual and Cult at Ugarit, Atlanta, Society of the Biblical Literature, coll. « Writings from the Ancient World » (no 10), 2002

Voir aussi
Liens externes
« Royaume d'Ougarit », sur Maison de l'Orient et de la Méditerranée (Université Lumière Lyon 2), site de l'équipe de chercheurs travaillant sur Ougarit.
Mission archéologique syro-française de Ras Shamra - Ougarit (jusqu'en 2016) et Mission archéologique syro-française de Ras Shamra - Ougarit (à partir de 2017)
« Ougarit », sur Archeologie.culture.gouv.fr (consulté le 24 juillet 2023) : site réalisé par l'équipe de chercheurs française travaillant sur Ougarit.

Articles connexes
Ras Ibn Hani
Minet el-Beida
Ougaritique (langue)
Alphabet ougaritique
Religion d'Ougarit

 Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de l'Antiquité   Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail des Phéniciens et de la civilisation carthaginoise   Portail de la Syrie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
DEAD CITIES
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:30:19


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 638
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_Cities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Dead Cities (Arabic: المدن الميتة) or Forgotten Cities (Arabic: المدن المنسية) are a group of 700 abandoned settlements in northwest Syria between Aleppo and Idlib. Around 40 villages grouped in eight archaeological parks situated in north-western Syria provide an insight into rural life in Late Antiquity and during the Byzantine period. Most of the villages, which date from the 1st to 7th centuries, were abandoned between the 8th and 10th centuries. The settlements feature the well-preserved architectural remains of buildings such as dwellings, pagan temples, churches, cisterns and bathhouses. Important dead cities include the Church of Saint Simeon Stylites, Dahis, Serjilla, Ruweiha and al Bara.
The Dead Cities are situated in an elevated area of limestone known as Limestone Massif. These ancient settlements cover an area 20–40 km (12–25 mi) wide and some 140 km (87 mi) long. The Massif includes three groups of highlands: the first is the northern group of Mount Simeon and Mount Kurd; the second middle group is the group of Harim Mountains; the third southern group is the group of Zawiya Mountain.

History
Chris Wickham, in the authoritative survey of the post-Roman world, "Framing the Early Middle Ages" (2006) argues that these were settlements of prosperous peasants which have few or no specifically urban features. The impressive remains of domestic architecture are the result of the prosperity of peasants who benefited from a strong international trade in olive oil at the end of Antiquity.
Another argument is that these were prosperous cities that flourished because they were located along major trade routes in the Byzantine Empire, and not merely prosperous peasant settlements. After conquest by the Arabs, the trade routes changed, and as a result, these towns lost the majority of the business which fostered their economies. On this view, settlers eventually abandoned their towns and headed for other cities that were flourishing under the Arabs and the Umayyads as increasing urbanisation took its toll.
The ancient villages of the Dead Cities illustrate the transition from the ancient pagan world of the Roman Empire to Byzantine Christianity.
The Dead Cites were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2011, under the name of "Ancient Villages of Northern Syria". The Dead Cities were the 1348th site to be added to UNESCO's World Heritage Site list. The Dead Cities have been on the Endangered UNESCO list since 2013, meaning the site was not endangered for only two years.
Before the Syrian Civil War most sites had become easily accessible, the majority of the dead cities were well-preserved and tourists could access the sites quite freely, though some of the Dead Cities are quite difficult to reach without a guide (there is a guidebook by Abdallah Hadjar with a detailed map that is useful for finding the lesser known sites; The Church of St Simeon Stylites and Other Archaeological Sites in the Mountains of Simeon and Halaqa. However, the Syrian Civil War has caused Syrian refugees to flee to these sites in hopes of finding shelter. In various areas, refugees have repurposed the stone ruins located on these sites to rebuild their livelihoods.

Archeological sites
Dead cities and archeological sites in Limestone Massif include Church of Saint Simeon Stylites, Serjilla, Bara, Basufan, Barisha, Qalb Loze, Barad, Cyrrhus, Turmanin, Banabil, Kafr Aruq, Kafr Dariyan, Babuline, Hazarin, Jarada, Maghara, Shinan, Farkya, Ein Laruz, Ebla, Deir Sunbul, Al-Dana, Sarmada and Al-Dana.

Mount Simeon, Mount Kurd and Mount Ḥalqa
Harim Mountains (Mount Bārīshā and Mount A'lā)
Mount Zāwiya
See also
World Heritage Sites in Danger

References
Darke, Diana (2020). Stealing from the Saracens: How Islamic Architecture Shaped Europe. C Hurst & Co Publishers. ISBN 1787383059.

External links

Ancient Villages of Northern Syria, are inscribed on the UNESCO world heritage list, in 2011 and on the List of World Heritage in Danger in 2013.
Pictures of four dead cities


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 1,001
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D8%AF%D9%86_%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D9%86%D8%B3%D9%8A%D8%A9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

المدن المنسية أو المدن الميتة هي مدن وقرى أثرية سوريّة تقع ضمن الحدود الإدارية لمحافظتي حلب وإدلب، وهي المواقع والقرى الممتدة في جبال الكتلة الكلسية ووديانها وشعابها في شمال غربي سوريا، حيث تقع في مساحة قدرها 5500 كم2، تمتد من قورش (النبي هوري) شمالاً حتى أفاميا جنوباً ومن حلب شرقاً حتى منطقة جبل الزاوية ووادي العاصي غرباً، وهي من أكثر تجمعات المناطق الأثرية في العالم يعود بنائها إلى الفترة بين القرنين الأول والسابع للميلاد وأحياناً حتى القرن العاشر وهي من المناطق الهامة في تاريخ المسيحية، وقد بلغ عددها 800 موقع وقرية أثرية، منها ما هو مسكون حالياً ومنها ما هو غير مسكون ويقع معظمها في محافظتي حلب وإدلب، بُني فيها في فترة ازدهار المسيحية بين القرنين الرابع والسادس للميلاد أكثر من 2000 كنيسة كانت درّتها كاتدرائية القديس سمعان العمودي التي تم بناؤها بين 476-491 م كمجمع ديني كامل، التي كانت مكاناً للحج في الماضي وللسياحة في اليوم الحاضر، وقد أحصى المعهد الفرنسي لآثار الشرق الأوسط (IFAPO) عدد القرى والمواقع الأثرية في هذه المنطقة من شمال سوريا هو 778 قرية، بينما زاد عدد هذه القرى والمواقع حسب بحث الآباء الفرنسيسكان بقيادة عالم الآثار الكاهن (باسكال كاستيلانا)، حيث تجولوا في جبال الكتلة الكلسية وبخاصة في جبلي الدويلي والوسطاني وقاموا باكتشاف ما لم يكن معروفاً من القرى من قبل ليصبح عددها أكثر من 800 مدينة وقرية أثرية. والمنطقة من أهم المناطق القديمة الغنية بالآثار والمعالم التاريخية، فالتتابع التاريخي للحضارات فيها ترك آثاراً عدة في القرى الأثرية والتلال التاريخية الأثرية المنتشرة في كتلة الجبال الكلسية وعلى امتداد منطقة طولها 140 كم وعرض 20-40 كم. وقد أُضيفت المدن إلى قائمة مواقع التراث العالمي من قبل اليونسكو عام 2011.

جغرافيا المنطقة
تطلق تسمية الكتلة الكلسية على منطقة الجبال السبعة الواقعة شمال غربي سورية وما يحيط بها من سهول وتمتاز الكتلة الكلسية بصخور جبالها البيض، وتمتد من الشمال إلى الجنوب بطول 140 كم وعرض بين 20-40 كم، بحيث يمر محورها من قورش شمالاً وأفاميا جنوباً. يحدها من الغرب سهل الغاب ووادي العاصي، من الشمال الحدود التركية، من الجنوب طريق خان شيخون وأفاميا ومن الشرق طريق حلب معرة النعمان خان شيخون، وتتألف الكتلة الكلسية من سبعة جبال هي جبلي سمعان والحلقة، جبلي باريشا والأعلى، جبلي الدويلي والوسطاني، جبل الزاوية، وتأتي أهمية الكتلة الكلسية من كونها واحدة من المجموعات الجغرافية النادرة في حوض المتوسط التي تستطيع أن تقوم بنقل واقعي لصور الحياة الريفية في الماضي من خلال المواقع الأثرية الكثيرة المنتشرة فيها. وتقسم الكتلة الكلسية إلى ثلاثة أقسام:

القسم الشمالي
يضم جبل سمعان وحلقة، ويحده شمالاً قطمة وغرباً وادي عفرين ويبلغ أعلى ارتفاع له في قسمه الجنوبي الشيخ بركات (876 م) وفي سفحه الجنوبي سهل الدانا الذي تحيط به هضبات صخرية منخفضة تشكل جبل حلقة.

القسم الأوسط
يضم جبل باريشا وجبل الأعلى والدويلي والوسطاني. وقمة جبل باريشا الرئيسة في بطوطة وارتفاعها 647 م. يتصل هذا الجبل في نهايته الشرقية، عند سهل الدانا، بجبل سرير الذي يعتبر الرأس العالي في أقصى الجنوب لجبل سمعان ويطل سفح باريشا الغربي على وادي الشلف.

القسم الجنوبي
يضم جبل الزاوية، أو جبل ريحا، ويتألف من كتلتين يفصل بينهما واد قامت فيه مدينة البارة. أعلى قممه النبي أيوب (939 م) وجبل الأربعين (877 م) وتقريباً من قسمه الجنوبي الغربي تقوم مدينة أفاميا، أما إلى الشرق من حدود الكتلة الكلسية فتقوم سهول قنسرين وحماة.

أهم مواقع منطقة الكتلة الكلسية
أهم القرى في جبل سمعان وحلقة
براد
برج حيدر
كلوتا
خراب شمس
كفر نبو
سنخار
دير سمعان
المشبك
فافرتين
قصر البنات
سرقانيا
بطوطة
صوغانة
كيمار
دير مشمش
باصوفان
شيخ سليمان
قورش
سرجبلا

أهم القرى في جبل باريشا والأعلى
بابسقا
بحيو
قلب لوزة
باب الهوا
باريشا
باعودا
بتقوسا
داحس
صرفود
كرك بيزة
ماعز
الكفير
باموقا
باقرحا
دير سيتا
كفر دريان
بافتين
دارقيتا
كفر عروق
بتير
باشمشلي

أهم القرى في جبل الزاوية
رويحة
شنان
سرجيلا
جرادة
البارة
باعودة
دانا الجنوبية

الحياة السكنية في القرى الأثرية
بعد انتهاء فترة الاضطهادات الدينية التي استمرت خلال القرون الأولى للميلاد وسمح بالحرية الدينية مع صدور مرسوم ميلانو عام 3 1 3 م، اختارت نخبة من سكان المنطقة عيش حياة الترفع عن الدنيويات حياة تنسك وتقشف وقساوة عيش. وقد عاشت فئة من هؤلاء النساك في العراء التام ولجأ بعضهم إلى الكهوف للمبيت. كانت هناك فئة سميت نساك الأبراج حيث كان واحدهم يعمل في الحقل ثم يعود إلى برج مربع يبيت فيه ويقوم بنسخ المخطوطات ليلا.
كما كان هناك من أضاف إلى قساوة العيش في العراء اختيار الإقامة على عمود طيلة حياته وسمّوا العموديين وكان رائدهم القديس سمعان العمودي (390-459 م) وقد سمي النساك العموديون " شهداء أيام السلم.
أما طريقة التنسك الجماعي الأخيرة فكانت حياة الرهبنة الجماعية، رهبان الأديرة، حيث كان النساك يأكلون معاً ويصلون معاً وعند المساء يختلي كل واحد من المجموعة بصومعته ليبيت فيها. وكان من هؤلاء النساك من يظل ساهراً ويطلق عليهم «الساهرون» وقد تبعوا أسلوب الحياة النسكية الجماعية.

الحقب التاريخية
ازدهرت معظم مدن وقرى المنطقة في العصر الروماني والبيزنطي بين عامي 64 ق. م - 635 م.

انحدار القرى الأثرية
بدأ انحدار القرى الأثرية إثر الغزو الفارسي المستمر على فترات بين عامي 527 م وحتى 627 م وقطعهم لأشجار غابات الزيتون حيث تعد المنطقة هي الموطن الأول لشجرة الزيتون. منذ ذلك التاريخ بدأت تتفاقم أزمة داخلية مفادها محدودية الأراضي الزراعية وازدياد عدد السكان بحيث لم تعد الأراضي كافية لتأمين معيشتهم وقد أثرت الزلازل والأوبئة في القرن السادس نسبياً أيضا مما أدى إلى هجرة تلك المناطق، أضف إلى تلك الأسباب القطيعة التي حصلت بعد الفتح العربي الإسلامي عام 636 م بعد قيام الأمويين بغزو القسطنطينية من البحر وانقطاع طرق التجارة أمام تصدير الزيت زيت الزيتون والكرمة إلى أوروبا، كما كان للحروب بين الحمدانيين والبيزنطيين في المنطقة أثر على تدمير بعض القرى، واحتلال الفرنجة الصليبيين زاد من تدهور حالة القرى آنذاك فهجرت المنطقة إلى السهول الداخلية وحولت بعض مبانيها وكنائسها إلى حصون دفاعية.
وعادت الحياة في القرن التاسع عشر بشكل بطيء إلى بعض مراكز السكن الرئيسية وتسارع السكن الجديد والزراعة بعد الحرب العالمية الأولى بفضل زيادة الأمان في الريف وفتح الطرق الجديدة.
نما السكن في هذه القرى بشكل عشوائي وازدادت الدور السكنية المبنية بدون ترخيص بين المباني الأثرية ودون رقابة مما سبب هدم العديد من المباني التاريخية الأثرية الهامة.

معرض الصور
انظر أيضاً
قائمة جبال سوريا

مصادر
الآثار والتراث المعماري في المنطقة الشمالية الغربية في سوريا

مواقع على الشبكة
الآثار والتراث المعماري في المنطقة الشمالية الغربية في سوريا
دروب المشاة في المدن المنسية


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 460
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Dead_Cities
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
The Dead Cities are a dispersed collection of world heritage-listed in Northwestern Syria. These Roman and Early Christian towns towns once formed part of Antioch. They have long since been abandoned but make an interesting stop for tourists.

## Understand
Northwestern Syria has numerous ruins spanning recorded history:
Al Bara boasts pyramidal tombs and formerly grand archways set on modern farm land.
Serjilla is another famous dead city
The Simeon Stylites site is often included on tours of the region.

## Get in
Both Serjilla and Al Bara are reachable from Aleppo (or Hama) by a combination of taking regular public microbuses and hitchhiking the last stretch. Take a microbus to the city of Ma'aret an Nu'man, and switch to another microbus headed for Kafranbel from there.
Once there, its probably best to ask for walking directions, and start walking the road to Serjillah. Try waving down any vehicle that goes in the same direction, chances are very good they will offer you a ride free of charge.
The same approach works for the way back, and anyone taking you for a ride is likely to drop you off somewhere on the microbus route. Make sure to head back in time though, these microbusses cease operation as early as 16:00.
The Simeon Monastery can be reached in similar fashion from Aleppo. Take a microbus for Daret'Azze and walk/hitch a ride from there.
Aleppo has several bus stations closely laid out in a cluster, and it can be a daunting task to find the correct point of departure for your destination. The best source of information are people that work at the stations (food and drink vendors, drivers). Some will try to sell you an expensive chartered vehicle ride, but many are helpful and will point you in the right direction.

## See
36.38333336.91 Barad (براد).   (updated Jan 2025)
36.33333336.8666672 Basufan (باصوفان).   (updated Jan 2025)
36.30583336.8872223 Batuta (باطوطة).   (updated Jan 2025)
36.74416736.9591674 Cyrrhus.   (updated Jan 2025)
36.33416736.8441675 Church of Saint Simeon Stylites (كنيسة مار سمعان العمودي) (30 miles outside of Aleppo). A church built in 490 AD and World Heritage Site that was dedicated to the famous hermit, St Simeon the Stylite. This church was built around the pillar on which Simeon lived and prayed and became a major centre of pilgrimage. The church was heavily damaged by an air strike in 2015.      (updated Oct 2017)
35.79805636.7986116 Ebla (إيبلا). A city from circa 2500 BCE   (updated Jan 2025)
35.692536.4852787 Serjilla (سيرجيلة). Christian community from the 5th century CE.   (updated Jan 2025)
36.31638936.9005568 Surqaniya.   (updated Jan 2025)
36.2930736.798849 Zarzita (زرزيتا).   (updated Jan 2025)
36.19930636.69291710 Babisqa (بابسقا).   (updated Jan 2025)
36.20583336.65944411 Baqirha.   (updated Jan 2025)

## Stay safe
Travel to Syria is very dangerous. See the main Syria page for details.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
CHURCH OF SAINT SIMEON STYLITES
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: religious_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:30:27


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,583
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_of_Saint_Simeon_Stylites
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Church of Saint Simeon Stylites (Arabic: كنيسة مار سمعان العمودي, romanized: Kanīsat Mār Simʿān el-ʿAmūdī) is one of the oldest surviving church complexes, founded in the 5th century. It is located approximately 30 kilometres (19 mi) northwestern of Aleppo, Syria. It was constructed on the site of the pillar of Saint Simeon Stylites, a renowned stylite monk. The church is popularly known as either Qalaat Semaan (قلعة سمعان, Qalʿat Simʿān, the "Fortress of Simeon") or Deir Semaan (دير سمعان, Dayr Simʿān, the "Monastery of Simeon"). Completed in 490, it was not surpassed as a Christian church until the construction of Hagia Sophia was finished in 537.

History
Saint Simeon was born in 390 AD in the Amanus mountains village. He entered a monastery at the age of 16, but he was judged to be unsuited for cenobitic life due to his extravagant asceticism. Following the example of Saint Anthony, he attempted to live the life of a hermit ascetic in the wilderness, but his feats of physical endurance and self-denial attracted pilgrims seeking religious instruction and other devout admirers. In an effort to escape from such distractions, he resolved to live on a small platform atop a 3-meter column. The height of the column was raised over time to 18 meters. From his perch, Simeon preached twice a day to the crowds who gathered to witness this spectacle of self-mortification. A ladder attached to the column allowed messengers to bring food and written messages to Simeon, who also sent letters to his followers this way. He became well-known enough to attract the attention of the eastern emperors Theodosius, Leo, and Theodosius II, who sought his advice and implored his intervention in state affairs. Simeon lived on the column for years, dying in AD 459 at the approximate age of 69. After a fierce contest for the possession of his remains between Antioch and Constantinople, it was settled in favor of Antioch. His remains were transported to Antioch, accompanied by a procession of the patriarch of Constantinople, 6 bishops, the Master-General of the East, 21 counts and tribunes and 6,000 soldiers. His tomb became a major pilgrimage destination.
A few decades following Saint Simeon's death, a large monastic church occupying over 5,000 square meters was constructed on the site where his pillar stood. The church was made up of four basilicas that emanated from the sides of a central octagon. The octagonal crossing was surmounted by a dome; at its center stood Simeon's column. The church was the centerpiece of a walled monastic complex that included two minor churches, and pilgrim hostels. In the year 638 the monastery fell into the hands of the Miaphysites, and it was destroyed by Arab tribes in the year 985.

Long abandoned and ruined, the site is part of the series of ruins referred as the Dead Cities of Syria. Until just recently, remains of the pillar of Saint Simeon still stood, despite having been whittled down to a block only a few meters tall from years of pilgrims cutting down small parts for themselves as relics; substantial surviving parts of the column shaft were last visible in the 17th century. The dome above it apparently survived until the 19th century.

Architecture
As opposed to many of the cathedrals that were constructed in medieval Europe, the idea of the church of Saint Simeon was born and realized as one project over a short span of time. It was designed in a cruciform made up of four distinct basilica complexes. The high number of pilgrims who frequently flocked to the column of Saint Simeon to pray necessitated the construction of the church in 473 AD.
The ambitious plan of the church of Saint Simeon complex portrays numerous architectural designs. The fundamental concept of the three-aisled basilica can be traced to the lasting traditions of the Romans. It is reported that the main basilica and the baptistery were the first to be constructed. Subsequently, the monastery and the fixtures to the baptistery followed. Ultimately, the other parts of the complex including the colossal arch on the Via Sacra were built last in the construction process. A notable part of the church of Saint Simeon is the massive arch that is located at the beginning of the Via Sacra on the way to the cathedral on the mountain. In addition, two monasteries are visible from the church; a bazaar which is a few little housings, and a tomb chapel. The following are the numerous grouped buildings that were arranged at the complex.

The four-basilica church
The cross shaped church was finely preserved. Inside, the pillar of Saint Simeon is still visible, but it has been reduced to approximately 2 meters high and now resembles a boulder in the middle of the courtyard. The reduction in the length of the pillar can be attributed to many years of relic-gathering by pilgrims. The courtyard is octagonal and is bordered by four basilicas in the shape of a rood-tree and described as a four-basilica church. The idea of a crucifix was to represent the crucifixion of Jesus on the cross. The east basilica is considerably bigger than other basilicas. The more significant size can be attributed to the critical role it played in hosting key ceremonies, making it most important.

The U-shaped monastery
Bordering the south partition of the eastern basilica laid a chapel and a monastery. Originally, Deir Semaan (Simeon Monastery) bore the name of Telanissos and was established to make the most of the two productive plains that surrounded it. In the mid of the 5th century AD, the locals established a monastery on the plains and in 412 AD, Saint Simeon opted to be part of it. Later on, he left the locals to live there as he went to live in the mountain above the plains where the monastery was situated.

Baptistery
The baptistery was located on the opposite side of the southern basilica, down the sacred road known as Via Sacra. The baptistery was constructed shortly after the construction of the main church, and it served as a crucial part of the pilgrimage complex. The design of the baptistery was often regarded to be amongst the remarkable artifacts of the Christian architecture in the entire Syria. The baptistery was constructed in two phases; the baptistery itself first and related little basilicas later. The baptistery took the form of an octagonal drum that lay on the top of the square base of the building. At some point, it was filled with a wooden roof, with shape either like a cone or dome. The inner octagon was covered in a rectangular outer building. At the far end of the chamber to the east lays a semi-circular apsidiole that encompasses a tunnel with steps heading down to its location.

Extensions to the Baptistery
The processional route guides towards the Deir Semaan (Simeon Monastery) emanates from the western side of the baptistery. At the opening of this road is the monumental arch, which runs from the monastery in the direction of the baptistery. The location of the church on the hill provides views of the surrounding countryside.

UNESCO
As of June 2011, the Church and surrounding village were designated by United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) as part of the "Ancient Villages of Northern Syria", a World Heritage Site.

Wars
Arab-Byzantine War
The church was negatively affected by the Arab conquest during the struggle for control of Syria between the Byzantines and the Arabs. Afterwards, the Byzantines fortified the church. The complex was attacked and conquered by the emir of Aleppo Sa'd al-Dawla, who used it as a fortress. This compromised the symbolism of the complex as a holy site but did not stop worshippers from continuing to visit the complex to worship.

Syrian Civil War
The Syrian civil war has caused a lot of damage to the historical site in the violence between the opposing parties in the conflict. Additionally, the building has been destroyed through illegal digging and stone removal. It is one of the many ancient buildings on the Northern side of Syria which have been degraded by the conflict.  The structure has been under threat from both the Syrian and Turkish governments through their conflict over the Bab al-Hawa Border Crossing. On 28 May 2015, the church was captured by the Kurdish YPG/YPJ but was subsequently lost to factions opposing the Assad government. In May 2016, the Russian Air Force attacked the church, damaging the remains of the pillar of St Simeon as well as the rest of the ruins. By 8 February 2020, the hilltop near the site was occupied by the Turkish Land Forces.

Gallery
See also
Oldest churches in the world
History of Roman and Byzantine domes
350 Maronite Martyrs
Umar II

References
Sources
Gary Vikan, Byzantine Pilgrimage Art, (Dumbarton Oaks Papers, 1982), 8–9.
Simeon Citadel and Dead Cities, Suggestion to have Saint Simeon Stylites recognized as a UNESCO world heritage site, in 2006, as part of "Simeon Citadel and Dead Cities" project.
"St. Simeon Church." Syria Gate (accessed 2008).
Sacred Destinations
https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1348/multiple=1&unique_number=1761

Further reading
Weitzmann, Kurt, ed., Age of spirituality: late antique and early Christian art, third to seventh century, no. 590, 1979, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, ISBN 9780870991790

External links
 Media related to Church of Saint Simeon Stylites at Wikimedia Commons

180 photographs in gallery, PBase
Gatier, P.; T. Sinclair; M. Ballance; R. Warner; R. Talbert; T. Elliott; S. Gillies. "Places: 658606 (Symeon, Mon.)". Pleiades. Retrieved March 8, 2012.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
MAALOULA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: ancient_village
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:30:36


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,025
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maaloula
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Maaloula (Arabic: مَعلُولَا; Western Neo-Aramaic: ܡܥܠܘܠܐ ,מעלולא, romanized: Maʿlūlā) is a town in southwestern Syria. The town is located in the Rif Dimashq Governorate and is 56 km northeast of Damascus, and is built into the rugged mountainside at an altitude of more than 1,500m. It is known as one of three remaining villages where Western Neo-Aramaic is spoken, the other two being the nearby smaller villages of Jubb'adin and Bakh'a. However, Bakh'a was vastly destroyed during the Syrian Civil War, and all the inhabitants fled to other parts of Syria or to Lebanon.

Etymology
Maʿlūlā is said to derive from the Aramaic word maʿəlā, meaning "entrance". The name is romanized in multiple different ways, such as Maaloula, Ma'loula, Maalula, Ma'lula, Malula. However, "Maaloula" is the most common one.

History
Civil war
Maaloula became the scene of battle between the Al-Qaeda-linked insurgent group Al-Nusra Front and the Syrian Army in September 2013.
The insurgents took over the town on October 21. Around 13 people were killed, with many more wounded.
On October 28, government forces recaptured the town.
Maaloula was again taken over by the Al-Nusra Front on December 3, 2013. The group took 12 Orthodox nuns as hostages. The nuns were moved between different locations and ended up in Yabroud where they were held for three months. Officials from Lebanon negotiated a deal for their release. Those negotiations produced an agreement on a prisoner exchange under which around 150 Syrian women detained by the government were also freed. After the nuns were freed on 9 March 2014, they stated that they were mostly treated well by their captors.
On 14 April 2014, with the help of Hezbollah and SSNP, the Syrian Army once again recaptured the town. The success of Syrian government forces in recapturing Maaloula was part of a string of other successes in the strategic Qalamoun region, including the seizure of the former rebel bastion of Yabroud in the previous month.

Demographics
In 1838, its inhabitants were Antiochan Greek Orthodox Christians, Melkite Catholics, and a minority of Sunni Muslims. 
Presently, the population maintains religious diversity, with both Christians and Muslims identifying ethnically as Arameans Notably, the Muslim inhabitants have a remarkable legacy as they haven’t embraced an Arab ethnic identity, unlike the majority of other Syrians who underwent Islamization and, consequently, Arabization over the centuries.
In the middle of the 20th century, 15,000 people lived in Maaloula.
According to the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics, Maaloula had a population of 2,762 in the 2004 census. However, the population increases to about 10,000 during the summer, due to people coming from Damascus for holidays.

Language
With two other nearby towns, Bakh'a and Jubb'adin, Maaloula is the only place where a Western Aramaic language is still spoken, which it has been able to retain amidst the rise of Arabic due to its distance from other major cities and its isolating geological features. However, modern roads and transportation, as well as accessibility to Arabic-language television and print media – and for some time until recently, also state policy – have eroded that linguistic heritage.
As the last remaining area where Western Neo-Aramaic is still spoken, the three villages represent an important source for anthropological linguistic studies regarding first century Western Aramaic. According to scholarly consensus, the language of Jesus was a Western Middle Aramaic variety, Galilean Aramaic.

Monasteries
There are two important monasteries in Maaloula: the Melkite monastery of Mar Sarkis and the Antiochan Convent of Saint Thecla.

Saint Sarkis Monastic Complex
The Saint Sarkis Monastic Complex of Maaloula is one of the oldest surviving monasteries in Syria. It was built on the site of a pagan temple, and has elements which go back to the fifth to sixth century Byzantine period.
Saint Sarkis is the Aramaic name for Sergius, a Roman soldier who was executed for his Christian beliefs. This monastery still maintains its solemn historical character.
The monastery has two of the oldest icons in the world, one depicting the Last Supper.

Convent of Saint Thecla
This convent holds the remains of Thecla, which the second-century Acts of Paul and Thecla accounts a noble virgin and pupil of Paul the Apostle. According to later legend not in the Acts, Thecla was being pursued by soldiers of her father to capture her because of her Christian faith. She came upon a mountain, and after praying, the mountain split open and let her escape through. The town gets its name from this gap or entrance in the mountain. However, there are many variations to this story among the residents of Maaloula.

Other monasteries
There are also the remains of numerous monasteries, convents, churches, shrines and sanctuaries. There are some that lie in ruins, while others continue to stand, defying age. Many pilgrims come to Maaloula, both Muslim and Christian, and they go there to gain blessings and make offerings.

Virgin Mary statue
The people of Maaloula celebrated as a new statue of Mary, mother of Jesus was erected in its centre, replacing the figure destroyed in Islamist attacks in 2013. On 13 June 2015, Syrian officials unveiled the new statue of the Virgin Mary, draped in a white robe topped with a blue shawl, her hands lifted in prayer. The fibreglass figure stood at just over 3 metres (10 feet) tall and was placed on the base of the original statue.
The statue is titled "Lady of Peace" (Arabic: سيدة السلام, romanized: sayyidat as-salām).

Climate
Sister city
Béziers,  France (2014)

See also
Western Neo-Aramaic
Battle of Maaloula

References
Bibliography
External links

Yawna Maaloula Aramaic A non-profit educational initiative dedicated to the preservation of Aramaic - the language of Jesus - and the rich cultural heritage of Maaloula.
A website dedicated to Maaloula
New York Times article on Aramaic language in Maaloula and other villages in Syria
Syrian village clings to Aramaic language at Al Jazeera English
An episode from Australian program, Foreign Correspondent, about Maaloula.
The dialect of Maalula. Grammar, vocabulary and texts. (1897–1898) By Jean Parisot (in French): Parts 1, 2, 3 at the Internet Archive.
Samples of spoken Western Neo-Aramaic at the Semitisches Tonarchiv (Semitic Audio Archive)
Bakh’a dialect
Jubb'adin dialect
Maalouli dialect


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 901
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maaloula
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Maaloula (en arabe : معلولا / maʿlūlā, de l'araméen : ܡܥܠܐ / ma`lā, « entrée ») est un village de la montagne syrienne, situé au nord de Damas. Il présente la particularité, ainsi que les villages alentour, d'abriter une population qui parle encore l'araméen (voir néo-araméen occidental). Dans les années 2000, la population sunnite est majoritaire en hiver, et aux deux tiers chrétienne l'été. Le village doit sa renommée à ses refuges troglodytiques datant des premiers siècles du christianisme.

Situation
Maaloula est situé à presque 1 400 mètres d'altitude, dans le djebel Qalamoun, qui fait partie de la chaine de l'Anti-Liban, à 56 km au nord de Damas, en Syrie. Il descend sur le versant sud des pentes du même nom.

Histoire
Les habitants, païens du temps de l'Empire romain, se sont convertis au christianisme dans les premiers temps de l'Église à l'époque romaine, six siècles avant la conquête arabe.
Sous le mandat français, au cours de la grande révolte syrienne, le village est attaqué et assiégé à plusieurs reprises entre octobre 1925 et juin 1926 par les rebelles commandés par Ramadan al-Shallash. Les Français, qui font confiance aux populations chrétiennes, distribuent des armes aux villageois.

Population
La population du village s'élève en hiver à deux mille habitants, dont la majorité sont musulmans, et elle augmente en été, jusqu'à cinq mille habitants, lorsque les travailleurs migrants (qui travaillent dans d'autres villes de Syrie, au Liban et même en Turquie) rejoignent le village de Maaloula dont ils sont originaires, ainsi que des familles de Maaloulites habitant Damas et y passent l'été en famille. La population chrétienne devient alors majoritaire durant l'été.
La majorité des chrétiens locaux appartiennent à l'Église grecque-catholique melchite et à l'Église grecque-orthodoxe d'Antioche. Le village est célèbre au Proche-Orient pour la ferveur et la solennité avec lesquelles il célèbre, chaque 14 septembre, la fête de la Croix. On allume de grands feux sur les collines et l'on invite les habitants et les visiteurs, chrétiens ou musulmans nombreux à venir en période de paix, à de grands diners après les cérémonies religieuses.

Monastères
Le village abrite, parmi des monastères en ruines, le monastère Mar Takla, grec-orthodoxe, construit autour de la grotte et du tombeau de sainte Thècle, princesse séleucide et disciple de saint Paul, fêtée le 24 septembre.
En haut d'un rocher qui domine le village se dresse un antique monastère (construit au IVe siècle), desservi par un prêtre grec-catholique et dédié à Mar Sarkis et Mar Bacchus (saints Serge et Bacchus), deux saints martyrs fêtés le 7 octobre, qui étaient fort populaires dans l'Empire romain d'Orient.

Galerie
Guerre civile syrienne
Le village est relativement épargné par les attaques jusqu'à l'été 2013. Un check-point à l'entrée du village fait l'objet d'un attentat-suicide le 4 septembre, puis des groupes armés rebelles et des islamistes du Front al-Nosra y prennent position le 7 septembre 2013. Un certain nombre d'habitants prennent la fuite. Selon certaines sources, dans la ville, les djihadistes auraient tué au moins 20 civils de confession chrétienne et enlevé 15 autres. Selon d'autres sources au contraire, il pourrait s'agir de désinformation du régime, car les habitants auraient fui le village avant (seules restaient quelques dizaines de personnes) et des témoignages contestent les exactions. La mort de trois chrétiens du village a été documentée, qui selon certaines sources seraient morts en combattant. L'armée syrienne lance une opération afin de reprendre le village. Cette offensive est d'abord repoussée à la suite de l'arrivée de renforts djihadistes, puis aboutit le 19 septembre 2013.
Le 1er décembre 2013, les islamistes s'emparent à nouveau de la ville et enlèvent douze religieuses du monastère orthodoxe de Sainte-Thècle, finalement libérées en mars 2014 contre 150 prisonniers du régime syrien, essentiellement des femmes.
Selon Frédéric Pichon, les djihadistes commettent un « véritable massacre archéologique », pillant l'église conventuelle, un des plus vieux édifices chrétiens du monde, datant du début du IVe siècle, détruisant des icônes exceptionnelles. Selon d'autres sources, y compris des responsables religieux, il n'y a eu « ni massacre ni profanation des lieux saints », pas de destruction ni de pillage lors de la prise du village par les groupes rebelles. De leur côté, des combattants d'opposition affirment avoir ordonné de ne pas s'en prendre aux chrétiens qui ne combattaient pas aux côtés du régime et de ne pas rester sur place afin d'éviter que l'aviation du régime ne détruise les sites historiques en les visant.
Le village est repris par les loyalistes et le Hezbollah le 14 avril 2014.

Personnalités
Jalal Altawil (1981- ), acteur, metteur en scène, présentateur de télévision et de radio, né à Maaloula.

Jumelage
Béziers (France) depuis 2014

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Frédéric Pichon, Bernard Heyberger, Maaloula (XIXe – XXIe siècles). Du vieux avec du neuf : Histoire et identité d'un village chrétien de Syrie, IFPO, 2010 voir en ligne
Rimon Wehbi, Die aramäischen Wassermühlen in Maalula, Heidelberg, Heidelberg University, 2017
(de) Rimon Wehbi, « Zwei neuwestaramäische Texte über die Wassermühlen in Maalula (Syrien) », Harrassowitz Verlag, Wiesbaden, vol. 28, no 1,‎ 2021, p. 135–153 (DOI 10.13173/MLR.28.1.135, lire en ligne)

Voir aussi
Articles connexes
Syriaque
Araméen
Christianisme en Syrie
Bataille de Maaloula

Liens externes
Maaloula, Sednaya et les villages araméens de l'anti-Liban, par Sigismund Sussia Reich.
Maaloula, sur le site Aly-abbara.

Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste indicative du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire  

 Portail des chrétiens d’Orient   Portail de la Syrie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SEDNAYA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: ancient_village
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:30:44


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,714
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saidnaya
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Saidnaya (Arabic: صيدنايا, romanized: Ṣaydnāyā), also transliterated as Saydnaya, Seidnaya or Sednaya, is a city located in the mountains, 1,500 m (4,900 ft) above sea level, 27 km (17 mi) north of the city of Damascus in Syria. It is the home of a Greek Orthodox monastery traditionally held to have been founded by Byzantine emperor Justinian I, and where a renowned icon of the Virgin Mary is revered by Christians to this day. According to the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), Saidnaya had a population of 5,194 in the 2004 census.

Etymology
Local tradition holds that Saydnaya means ‘Halting-place of the gazelle’.  The place-name has also been thought to mean Our Lady the New, from the Greek nea, ‘new’, and the Arabic sayyida, ‘lady’. However, the word sayd is generally related to hunting, and naya is a typical place-suffix in Syriac; therefore, Saydnaya probably means simply a hunting-place. Indeed, in ancient times, a temple of Saydoun, the Phoenician god of the hunt, stood in this once densely forested region. Under later Christian and Arabic influence, perhaps the name may have been thought to mean the ‘place of the Lady’.
The Hellenistic-era name for the region centered in the Barada Valley was Abilene: the local tradition has thus long held it as the site where the grave of Abel, slain brother of Cain, lies.  Scholars consider it likely that the capital of Abilene was the city of Saidnaya.

Overview
Long a center of Christian pilgrimage, pilgrims from all over the world seek Saidnaya for renewal of faith and for healing. Renowned for its faithfulness to Christianity, tradition holds that the Convent of Our Lady of Saidnaya was constructed by the Byzantine emperor Justinian I in 547 AD, after he had two visions of Mary, one that indicated where to build the church and the other outlining its design. Justinian dedicated the finished project to the feast of Mary's Nativity, and annually thereafter on September 8, and through to the present day, both Muslim and Christian pilgrims have come to commemorate the feast day of Our Lady of Saidnaya. Also located in the convent of Saidnaya is an icon of the Holy Mother and Child known as the Shaghurah and reputed to have been painted by Luke the Evangelist which is believed to protect its owners from harm in times of danger.
Due in no small measure to its protected mountainous location, Saidnaya enjoyed religious peace throughout its history, even during times of war, such as during the Crusades. Local Muslims visit the convent sanctuary on the day of Friday prayers and share in the legends regarding this holy place. Christians and Muslims from the region and from far away places seek the shrine for healing. Numerous accounts of miraculous healings have been reported, some which are documented in writing by those who experienced them throughout history.
Saidnaya has about more than 40 chapels and monasteries and the most famous one is the convent of the Virgin Mary. Many other Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Syriac Catholic and Syriac Orthodox churches and monasteries have been built in Saidnaya throughout history. On top of the highest mountain in Saidnaya is the Cherubim Monastery at 2,000 metres (6,561.68 feet) above sea level, overlooking Damascus' fertile plains and Lebanon's mountains. There is also the Monastery of Mar Thomas and a few massive monasteries built more recently such as St. Thomas Creek Catholic Monastery, St. Estphariuos Orthodox Monastery, and St. Ephram Syriac Monastery. A bronze statue of Jesus Christ with 33.10 m high, was installed on 14 October 2013 financed by both the Russian Orthodox Church and the Russian government, The statue is near the Monastery of the Cherubim, perched above the historic pilgrimage route from Constantinople to Jerusalem.
The weather is cold and snowy in winter, while it is warm and has fresh air in summer. Surviving vestiges of caves, grottos and ancient places in and around Saydnaya indicate that it was inhabited by different civilizations from the early Stone Age, with artifacts from Aramaic, Greek, Syriac, Roman, and Arab times.

History
Saidnaya's origins are in ancient times, and the town has been inhabited since at least the sixth century BC when it was known by its Aramaic name, Danaba. It emerged as an important center of Christianity well before it was adopted as the official religion of the Roman Empire. Macarius, the first bishop of Aleppo and later the Patriarch of Antioch, lists Saidnaya in a seventeenth-century Arabic manuscript as one of the seven ancient episcopal cities under Damascus, the same cities represented at the First Council of Nicaea in 325 AD.

Icon of the All-Holy Virgin
In the late 8th century, a certain venerable Marina was abbess of the convent, and she was widely revered for her piety and sanctity of life. It happened that a hermit monk, a Greek pilgrim from Egypt named Theodore, stopped at the convent on his way to the Holy Land. When he was leaving, Abbess Marina asked him to buy in Jerusalem a precious and fine icon of the Holy Virgin. While at Jerusalem, he utterly forgot the task entrusted to him and started on his return journey. However, when he had not gone far from the city, he was stopped short by an unfamiliar voice: "Have you not forgotten something in Jerusalem? What have you done in regard to the commission from Abbess Marina?" Monk Theodore returned at once to Jerusalem and found an icon of the Theotokos. During the journey back to the convent, he was astounded by the miracles accomplished through the icon. He and his whole caravan were ambushed by bandits, and then attacked by wild beasts. Amidst these dangers, the hermit always invoked the aid of the Holy Virgin while holding her icon, and he and all the caravan were saved from every peril.
These events tempted him to keep the valuable icon for himself, and he decided to bypass Saidnaya and sail back to Egypt. However, he was unable to set sail, for such a fierce storm arose, it seemed the ship would inevitably sink. His conscience was pricked, and he quickly left the ship and returned by way of Saidnaya. After spending four days in the convent, he was again possessed by an irresistible desire to make the icon of the Mother of God his own. He apologized to the abbess, pretending that he had been unable to buy the required icon, and then he decided to leave the convent secretly. The next morning, as he was about to set out on the journey back to his own country and approached the convent gate, he was amazed to find that an invisible power barred his way, and it was as though a stone wall stood where the gate should have been. After many futile attempts, he was forced to hand the icon over to the abbess, confessing his intention. With tears of gratitude she glorified the Lord and His All-pure Mother. Today the holy Icon is visited by pilgrims seeking the Virgin Mary's blessings as it is believed to grant (or at least intercede for) healing and fertility miracles. It is notable that Syrian Muslims often visit and pray before the Icon as well.

Construction of the convent
According to the tradition, emperor Justinian I, while crossing Syria with his troops either on his way to the Holy Land or on a campaign against the Persians, came to this desert, where his army encamped and soon suffered thirst for lack of water. When they despaired, the emperor saw a beautiful gazelle off in the distance. He vigorously gave chase, hunting the animal until it tired and stopped on a rocky knoll and approached a spring of fresh water, but without giving the emperor the opportunity to shoot it. Suddenly, it transformed into an icon of the  Theotokos, which shone with a brilliant light. A white hand stretched forth from it and a voice said, "No, thou shalt not kill me, Justinian, but thou shalt build a church for me here on this hill." Then the strange heavenly light and majestic figure disappeared. Upon his return, Justinian related what he had seen to his subordinates and ordered them immediately to draw up a plan for the contemplated church. After some time had passed and the architects were unable to resolve the problems of the plan, the Holy Virgin — the gazelle — reappeared to Justinian in a dream and confided a magnificent plan to him for a convent, of which she would be the protectress. It is said that the basic structure of the convent follows this plan to this day. The convent soon gained such renown that it came to be ranked second only to Jerusalem as a place of pilgrimage, and nuns from every corner of Syria, Egypt, and other lands flocked to it. The holy icon El Chagoura appeared many years after the convent was constructed.
In From the Holy Mountain, William Dalrymple notes that in Arabic, Saidnaya means both "our lady" and "hunting place", and the legend is likely related to this.

Crusader period
Magister Thietmar, a German pilgrim, wrote of his pilgrimage to Saidnaya, devoting four pages to a description of the icon of Holy Mother and Child found at the convent. He describes the origin story behind the icon and its special properties, and how a holy oil emitted from the breasts of the Virgin Mary is believed to be a miraculous oil that can heal the sick. In September 1240, after Thibaut de Champagne concluded a treaty with the sultan of Egypt, the Benedict of Alignan made a pilgrimage to St. Mary's of Saidnaya with the sultan's permission. The trip is seen as evidence of both Saidnaya's importance to Christian pilgrims in the thirteenth century and the relative safety of travel for Christians in Muslim areas during this time.
Chronicles from the thirteenth century also report that Templar Knights would go to the mountain monastery in Saidnaya to collect holy oil for Templar churches in Europe.

Modern era
In 1838, Eli Smith noted Saidanaya as being populated by Sunni Muslims and Antiochian Greek Christians. The Hollywood actor Michael Ansara was born in Saidnaya in 1922.

See also
Sednaya Prison
Christians in Syria

References
Bibliography
External links

Saidnaya.com
Saydnayatoday.com


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 467
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seidnaya
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Seidnaya, Sednaya, Saydnaya ou Saidnaya (en arabe : صيدنايا / ṣaydnāyā [sˁedˈnaːjaː] ; en syriaque : ܣܝܕܢܝܐ) est une ville de la montagne syrienne où la langue araméenne (langue parlée par le Christ) est encore parlée par certains habitants.
Sa population est presque exclusivement chrétienne, toutes confessions confondues, et est le refuge des chrétiens de Damas l'été. Le monastère Notre-Dame de Seidnaya est particulièrement renommé.

Dans les environs, sur le mont Cherubim (« montagnes des Chérubins »), a été érigée en 2013, par les Églises orthodoxes d'Ukraine et de Russie, une statue monumentale du Christ. Placée à une altitude de 2 100 mètres, la sculpture peut être vue depuis le Liban, la Jordanie, la Palestine et Israël, a indiqué l'Académie théologique de Moscou, à l'origine du projet.
Au cours de la guerre civile syrienne, le nom de Saidnaya devient connu dans le monde entier pour la prison militaire qui s'y trouve, décrite comme l'une des pires de Syrie, ou encore comme un « abattoir humain ».

Histoire
Le nom du village est souvent expliqué comme provenant du mot syriaque signifiant « Notre Dame ». Mais selon Jacques Briend, « le toponyme Saidnaya/ayya : « le(s) Sidonien(s) » » serait l'« indice probable d'un domaine royal particulier concédé à des Phéniciens dans un contexte araméophone. »

Moyen Âge
Maître Thietmar, auteur médiéval allemand de chroniques décrit son pèlerinage à Seidnaya et consacre quatre pages à l'icône de la Mère de Dieu se trouvant au monastère. Il relate les origines de la dévotion à cette icône, ainsi que le miracle de l'huile émanant de cette icône. En septembre 1240, après que Thibaut III de Champagne eut conclu un traité avec le sultan d'Égypte, le bénédictin Benoît d'Alignan fait un pèlerinage à Notre-Dame de Seidnaya avec la permission du sultan. Cela prouve l'importance de ce pèlerinage pour les chrétiens de l'époque, autant pour les chrétiens d'Orient que pour ceux de l'Église latine.
Les chroniques du XIIIe siècle rapportent aussi que les Templiers se rendaient régulièrement au monastère de Seidnaya, afin de prendre de l'huile sainte pour leurs églises en Europe occidentale.

XXIe siècle
Au cours de la guerre civile syrienne, le nom de la ville de Saidnaya devient célèbre dans le monde entier pour la prison qui s'y trouve. La prison de Saidnaya est en effet décrite comme l'une des pires de Syrie, ou encore comme un « abattoir humain », par l'ONG Amnesty international.

Voir aussi
Prison de Saidnaya

Références
Bibliographie
(en) Jaroslav Folda, Crusader Art in the Holy Land: From the Third Crusade to the Fall of Acre, 1187-1291, Cambridge, 2006, éd. Cambridge University Press,  (ISBN 978-0-521-83583-1)
(en) David Nicolle, Christa Hook & Graham Turner, Acre 1291: Bloody Sunset of the Crusader States, 2005, Osprey Publishing,  (ISBN 978-1-84176-862-5)

Liens externes

 Portail de la Syrie   Portail des chrétiens d’Orient



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
AMRIT
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:30:52


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,126
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amrit
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Amrit (Arabic: عمريت), the classical Marathus (Ancient Greek: Μάραθος, Marathos), was a Phoenician port located near present-day Tartus in Syria. Founded in the third millennium BC, Marat (Phoenician: 𐤌𐤓𐤕, MRT) was the northernmost important city of ancient Phoenicia, with relations to nearby Arwad. During the 2nd century BC, Amrit was defeated and its site largely abandoned, leaving its ruins well preserved and without extensive remodeling by later generations.

History
The city lies on the Mediterranean coast around 6 km (3.7 mi) south of modern-day Tartus. Two rivers cross the city: Nahr Amrit, near the main temple, and Nahr al-Kuble near the secondary temple, a fact that might be linked to the importance of water in the religious traditions in Amrit. The city was probably founded by the Arvadites, and was considered one of the "daughters of Arwad" on the coastline. Marathus served as Arwad's continental base, although the port of Arwad in the mainland was Carne. It grew to be one of the wealthiest towns in the dominion of Arwad. The city surrendered, along with Arwad, to Alexander the Great in 333 BC. During Seleucid times the town, known as Marathus, was probably larger and more prosperous than Arwad. In 219 BC Marathus gained independence from Arwad, and was later sacked by forces from the latter city in 148 BC. Strabo described Marathus as ruins at his time.

Excavation
Excavations of the site principally began in 1860 by Ernest Renan. Excavations were again carried out in 1954 by French archaeologist Maurice Dunand. Ceramic ware finds at Amrit indicated the site had been inhabited as early as the third millennium BC. Middle and Late Bronze Age "silo tombs" were also excavated, with contents ranging from weapons to original human remains. Excavations at the necropolis south of the town yielded several tomb structures. The funeral art found in some tombs with pyramidal-or cube-shaped towers, is considered some of "the most notable grave-monuments of the Phoenician world." Excavations also uncovered the town's ancient harbor, and a U-shaped stadium that dates back to the 4th and 3rd centuries BC and measures around 230 m (750 ft) in length.

Temples
One of the most important excavations at Amrit was the Phoenician temple, commonly referred to the "ma'abed," dedicated to the god Melqart of Tyre and Eshmun. The colonnaded temple, excavated between 1955 and 1957, consists of a large court cut out of rock measuring 47 × 49 m (154 × 161 ft) and over 3 m (9.8 ft) deep, surrounded by a covered portico. In the center of the court a well-preserved cube-shaped cella stands. The open-air courtyard was filled with the waters of a local, traditionally sacred spring, a unique feature of this site. The temple—which was dated to the late 4th century BC, a period following the Persian expansion into Syria—shows major Achaemenid influence in its layout and decoration. According to Dutch archaeologist, Peter Akkermans, the temple is the "best-preserved monumental structure from the Phoenician homeland."
A second temple, described by visitors to the site in 1743 and 1860 and thought to have disappeared, was later discovered by the Syrian archaeological mission near the Nahr al-Kuble spring.

Stadium
About 200 m (660 ft) northeast of the main temples of ancient Marathos and 180 m (590 ft) north of the Amrit Tell are the remains of a rock-carved Phoenician stadium. It is separated from the other two archaeological sites by the Nahr al-Amrit and a site called by the locals al-Meqla '(the quarry'). The Stadium of Amrit was first described in 1745 by Richard Pococke in Part 2 of his book, A Description of the East, and Some Other Countries, as the site where an ancient Circus was held. Ernest Renan examined it in 1860 and discussed it in his book Mission de Phénicie, making the conclusion that the complex was not Roman in its entirety and that the stadium was undoubtedly Phoenician. The stadium is about 225 to 230 meters long and 30 to 40 meters wide, it has similar dimensions to the stadium of Olympia in Greece (213 × 31/32 meters). Seven rows of seats have been partially preserved. The stadium was open to the west and had two entrances on the east side between seats. In addition, there was a tunnel to the interior. The stadium is located approximately at a right angle to the main temple of Amrit, the Maabed. The temples to the north and west have open sides or which the stadium forms a common intersection. It is believed that the  Amrit stadium was the location for sacred competitions where anointing and funeral games took place. Labib Boutros, former director of athletics at the American University of Beirut has conducted recent studies of the stadium and suggested that its construction may date back as far as 1500 BC, saying that the Amrit stadium was "devoted to sports in Phoenicia several centuries before the Olympic Games".

Necropolis
The Necropolis in the south of Amrit consists of underground burial chambers and two distinguishing burial towers called by the locals "al Maghazil" or The Spindles that stand up to 7.5 m (25 ft) high. The larger tower is composed of a square stone base with a slightly upward tapering cylindrical block with a base diameter of 3.7 m (12 ft), rising to a pyramid as a top termination, which is badly damaged. The second is approximately 12 meters southeast and is not quite 7 m (23 ft) tall. At its base are three cylindrical parts whose diameters decrease and terminate in a dome. At the lower cylinder, to the corners of the square base plates, four lions decorate the building, which may not have been completed. Excavations of the burial chambers east of the towers has uncovered finds dated back as far as the 5th century BC. Plain limestone and clay sarcophagus were found arranged in cassette-like formation within the chambers. Other tombs are located south of the Nahr al-Qubli, the "al-Burǧ Bazzāq" or Worm tower, a phenomenal structure that was originally 19.50 meters high and the Hypogeum "Ḥaǧar al-Ḥublā" with three burial chambers, which were still used in Roman times.

Conservation
Amrit was included on the 2004 and 2006 World Monuments Fund watch lists of endangered archaeological sites. The Fund called attention to the site's rapid deterioration due to vandalism and encroaching development. In 2006 a three-day workshop was organized with participation from the UNESCO, Directorate-General of Antiquities and Museums of Syria and local administrators responsible for the sites of Amrit, Tartus and Arwad.

Gallery
References
Citations
Bibliography
Head, Barclay; et al. (1911), "Phoenicia", Historia Numorum (2nd ed.), Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 788–801.

External links

The ancient city of Amrit (Arabic)
Pictures of the temple and stadium
Photos of Amrit at the American Center of Research


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 30
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amrit
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Amrit peut désigner :

amrit ou amrita, un nectar immortel dans les religions dharmiques (Hindouisme) ;
Amrit, un site archéologique en Syrie ;
Ajay Bhai Amrit, journaliste puis diplomate fidjien.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ARWAD
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: island
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:31:00


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,119
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arwad
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Arwad (Phoenician: 𐤀𐤓𐤅𐤃‎, romanized: ʾRWD; Arabic: أرواد, romanized: ʾArwād), the classical Aradus, is a town in Syria on an eponymous island in the Mediterranean Sea. It is the administrative center of the Arwad Subdistrict (nahiyah), of which it is the only locality. It is the only inhabited island in Syria. It is located 3 km (1.9 mi) from Tartus (the ancient Tortosa), Syria's second-largest port.
Today, Arwad is mainly a fishing town. According to the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics, during the 2004 census, it had a population of 4,403, predominantly Arab Sunni Muslims. Plans were unveiled in May 2016 to renovate the island to become a tourist attraction. The island is currently surrounded by ancient Phoenician era walls.

Etymology
The original Phoenician city was named Arwad Phoenician: 𐤀𐤓𐤅𐤃‎, romanized: ʾRWD and was located on an island named (𐤀𐤉𐤍𐤊‎, ʾYNK). It is mentioned in the Annals of Thutmose III at the Karnak Temple as jrtw. It eventually became known as Arvad, Arpad, and Arphad. These were hellenized as Árados (Ancient Greek: Ἄραδος), which was Latinized as Aradus. In Arabic, it became Arwad (أرواد).
Under the Seleucid Empire, Antiochus I renamed it Antioch after himself or the father of Seleucus the Great. It was distinguished from several other cities of that name as Antioch or Antiochia in Pieria (Ancient Greek: Ἀντιόχεια τῆς Πιερίας, romanized: Antiókheia tês Pierías).
Its site was also known as Ruad Island and Ile Rouad under the French occupation and mandate from 1916 to 1945. Postage stamps were issued in 1916 in the latter name.

History
Ancient history
Arwad has been continuously inhabited since at least the 3rd millennium BC. it was mentioned in the archive of the Royal Palace of Ebla, then at Alalakh.
The island was settled in the early 2nd millennium BC by the Phoenicians. Located some 50 kilometres (31 mi) north of Tripolis, it was a barren rock covered with fortifications and houses several stories in height. The island was about 800 m long by 500 m wide, surrounded by a massive wall, and an artificial harbor was constructed on the east toward the mainland. It developed into a trading city in early times, as did most of the Phoenician cities on this coast. It had a powerful navy, and its ships are mentioned in the monuments of Egypt and Assyria. In the Bible, an "Arvad" is noted as the forefather of the "Arvadites", a Canaanite people. The Phoenicians collected rain water in cisterns and shipped fresh water to the island, eventually discovering an undersea freshwater spring nearby.
The city of Arwad seems to have had a sort of hegemony over the northern Phoenician cities, from the mouth of the Orontes to the northern limits of Lebanon, something like that of Sidon in the south. It brought under its authority some of the neighboring cities on the mainland, such as Marat (present-day Amrit) and Sumur, the former nearly opposite the island and the latter some kilometers to the south. It had its own local dynasty and coinage, and some of the names of its kings have been recovered.

Egyptian Period
Thutmose III of Egypt took it in his campaign in north Syria (1472 BC), and it is noticed in the campaigns of Ramesses II in the early part of the 13th century BC.
It is also mentioned in the Amarna letters as being in league with the Amorites in their attacks on the Egyptian possessions in Syria.
About 1200 BC or a little later, it was sacked by invaders from Asia Minor or the islands, as were most of the cities on the coast. but it recovered when they were driven back.

Assyrian Period
Its maritime importance is indicated by the inscriptions of the Assyrian kings. Tiglath-pileser I (c. 1020 BC) boasts that he sailed in the ships of Arwad. Ashurnasirpal II (c. 876 BC) made it tributary, but it revolted and 200 men of Arwad were mentioned among the allies of Hadadezer of Aram Damascus at the Battle of Qarqar, when all Syria seems to have been in league against Shalmaneser III (c. 854). At this time, the king of Arwad was Mattan Baal. It was afterward tributary to Tiglath-pileser III and Sennacherib; under Sennacherib, its king was Abd-Ilihit c. 701. Ashurbanipal (c. 664) compelled its king Yakinlu to submit and send one of his daughters to become a member of the royal harem.

Persian Period
Under the Persians, Arwad was allowed to unite in a confederation with Sidon and Tyre, with a common council at Tripolis. The Book of Ezekiel refers to its seamen and soldiers in the service of Tyre.

Alexander the Great and Hellenistic Period
When Alexander the Great invaded Syria in 332 BC, the king of Arwad, Gerostratus, and his son Straton submitted to him without resistance and sent their navy to support his Siege of Tyre.It seems to have received the favor of the Seleucid kings of Syria and enjoyed the right of asylum for political refugees. It is mentioned in a rescript from Rome about 138 BC in connection with other cities and rulers of the East, to show favor to the Jews. This was after Rome had begun to interfere in the affairs of Judea and Syria and indicates that Arwad was still of considerable importance at that time.
The city has been cited as one of the first known examples of a republic in the Levant region, in which the people, rather than a monarch, are described as sovereign. The island was important as a base for commercial ventures into the Orontes valley.
Arwad inaugurated a new civic era in 259 BC, when its traditional royalty disappeared, and it became a free independent city within the Seleucid kingdom, during the reign of Antiochus II.

Roman Period
In Roman times, Arwad fiercely resisted Mark Antony when he came to Syria to find money there. When the city refused to co-operate, it was besieged in 38 BC, then eventually surrendered, which marked the end of its independence in 34–35 BC.

Bishopric
The city of Aradus, as it was then called, became a Christian bishopric. Athanasius reports that, under Roman Emperor Constantine the Great, Cymatius, the Chalcedonian bishop of Aradus and also of Antaradus (whose names indicate that they were neighbouring towns facing each other) was driven out by the Arians. At the First Council of Constantinople in 381, Mocimus appears as bishop of Aradus. At the time of the Council of Ephesus (431), some sources speak of a Musaeus as bishop of Aradus and Antaradus, while others mention only Aradus or only Antaradus. Alexander was at the Council of Chalcedon in 451 as bishop of Antaradus, Paulus as bishop of Aradus, while, at a synod held at Antioch shortly before, Paulus took part as bishop of both Aradus and Antaradus.

In 458, Atticus signed, as bishop of Aradus, the letter of the bishops of the province of Phoenicia Prima to Byzantine Emperor Leo I the Thracian protesting about the murder of Proterius of Alexandria. Theodorus or Theodosius, who died in 518, is mentioned as bishop of Antaradus in a letter from the bishops of the province regarding Severus of Antioch that was read at a synod held by Patriarch Mennas of Constantinople. The acts of the Second Council of Constantinople in 553 were signed by Asyncretius as bishop of Aradus. At the time of the Crusades, Antaradus, by then called Tartus or Tortosa, was a Latin Church diocese, whose bishop also held the titles of Aradus and Maraclea (perhaps Rachlea).
It was united to the see of Famagusta in Cyprus in 1295. No longer a residential bishopric, Aradus is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.

Medieval history
During the later part of the 13th century, in the time of the Crusades, the island of Ruad was used as a bridgehead or staging area by the Crusaders. It was the last piece of land that the Crusaders maintained in the Holy Land.
The Crusaders had lost control of the mainland in 1291 (see Fall of Acre), and the dwindling Kingdom of Jerusalem had been relocated to the island of Cyprus. In late 1300, in an attempt to coordinate military operations with the Mongol leader Ghazan, the Cypriots prepared a land-based force of approximately 600 men: 300 under Amalric of Lusignan, son of Hugh III of Cyprus, and similar contingents from the Templars and Hospitallers. The men and their horses were ferried from Cyprus to a staging area on Ruad, from which they launched raids on Tortosa while awaiting Mongol reinforcements. When the Mongols failed to arrive, the majority of the Christian forces returned to Cyprus, though a garrison was left on Ruad which was manned by rotating groups of different Cypriot forces. Pope Clement V formally awarded ownership of the island to the Knights Templar, who (in 1302) maintained a garrison with 120 knights, 500 bowmen and 400 Syrian helpers, under the Templar Maréchal (Commander-in-Chief) Barthélemy de Quincy.
In February 1301, the Mongols did arrive with a force of 60,000, but could do little else than engage in some raids around Syria. The Mongol leader Kutluqa stationed 20,000 horsemen in the Jordan Valley to protect Damascus, where a Mongol governor was installed. Soon however, they had to withdraw.
The Egyptian Mamluks, who had been systematically re-establishing control over Judea and Samaria and Syria, sought to take Ruad as well. A Mamluk fleet landed a force on the island, engaging in combat with the entrenched Templars, and then establishing a lengthy siege, culminating with the Fall of Ruad, and the Crusaders surrendering on September 26, 1302, following a promise of safe conduct. However, the promise was not honored: all the bowmen and Syrian helpers were killed, and the Templar knights were sent to Cairo prisons.

Contemporary era
During WWI, the island was occupied by the French navy on 1 September 1915, under the leadership of Admiral Louis Dartige du Fournet, including warships such as Jauréguiberry, Jeanne d'Arc and D'Estrées. Later on, Albert Trabaud was appointed as its governor. Afterwards, the island was bombed by the Ottomans in November 1917, but their attack was repulsed by French sailors.
Under the French Mandate the dungeons of the fortress were used as a prison for those opposing French rule, as the captives' still-visible graffiti attest.
In 1945, at the end of WWII, France wanted to preserve the island, hence started working to build a military base, in a geopolitical framework, to maintain a military position in the region, and to keep a cultural influence. But as a result of pressure from the United States, the island was ceded unconditionally to Syria at the end of 1945, a decision confirmed in 1946.
During the later half of the 20th century and the 21st century, the island's economy became more reliant on tourism, fishing and boatbuilding. This tourism focused economy was greatly impacted by the Syrian Civil War, due to the decreased travel to Syria. However, there has been no conflict on the island during the war, and it has been controlled by government forces from the beginning of the war until the Fall of the Assad regime on December 8, 2024. Despite this, at least 20 islanders have lost their life in the course of the war. The COVID-19 pandemic has also affected the island's economy, further weakening the tourism industry, with many local businesses losing potential tourist related income.

See also
Arad, Bahrain
Arvada, Colorado
Cities of the ancient Near East
List of Crusader castles
List of islands of Syria

References and sources
References
Sources
Malcolm Barber, Trial of the Templars
Martin Bernal, Black Athena Writes Back (Durham: Duke University Press, 2001), 359.
Lawrence I Conrad, ‘The Conquest of Arwād: A Source-critical study in the historiography of the early medieval Near East’, in The Byzantine and early Islamic Near East: Papers of the First Workshop on Late Antiquity and Early Islam, edited by Averil Cameron and Lawrence I Conrad, Studies in late antiquity and early Islam, 1, vol. 1, Problems in the literary source material (Princeton: Darwin Press, 1992), 317–401.
Alain Demurger, The Last Templar
Hazlitt, The Classical Gazetteer, p. 53.
Lebling, Robert W. 2016. "Arwad, Fortress at Sea". Aramco World. January February 2016. Volume 67, no. 1. Pages 34–41.
Newman, Sharan (2006). Real History Behind the Templars. Berkley Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-425-21533-3.
Jean Richard, Les Croisades
Sylvia Schein, "Gesta Dei per Mongolos"
Dave Eggers, Zeitoun
Krahmalkov, Charles R (2000). Phoenician-Punic dictionary. Peeters Publishers.

External links

L'île d'Arwad, Suggestion to have Arwad recognized as a UNESCO world heritage site, in 1999
Hazlitt's Classical Gazetteer
Hundreds of pictures of the island
Google Earth location
Small Islands in the Near East
http://www.tartous-city.com
Syrian Ministry of Tourism Arwad Regeneration Programme


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,346
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arouad
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Arouad (en arabe : ارواد), Rouad (en français), Arwad (en phénicien), Arados (en grec ancien : Άραδος), Aradus, Arpad, Arphad, Armada, Aruda, Irwada, Riwada, Antioche de Pieria (en grec ancien : Αντιόχεια της Πιερίας), est une île de la mer Méditerranée, la seule île habitée de la Syrie.

Géographie
Arouad est située dans la mer Méditerranée, à trois kilomètres au large des côtes syriennes, en face de la ville de Tartous. La ville moderne occupe toute l'île qui mesure 20 ha de superficie.

Histoire
Antiquité
L'île est habitée dès le IIe millénaire av. J.-C. par une population phénicienne. Sous contrôle phénicien, la ville est indépendante et on l'appelle Arwad ou Jazirat[réf. nécessaire] (qui signifie « île »). L'île, fortifiée par d'épaisses murailles, est un important centre commercial pour la vallée de l'Oronte et le grand commerce maritime. Son riche terroir et le commerce de la pourpre font sa prospérité.
Dès la campagne du roi assyrien Téglath-Phalasar Ier, les sources cunéiformes attestent l'existence d'un territoire continental, qui devait sans doute assurer le ravitaillement de l'île et permettre l'enterrement des morts. Un sanctuaire de Melkart a été identifié sur la côte à Amrit, où se trouvait une source et un bassin consacré, et il était entouré de nécropoles. Arwad était une cité-état phénicienne, gouvernée par des rois et possédant aussi des organismes représentatifs des citoyens. Elle paie tribut à Assurnazirpal II et, en 853 av. J.-C., son roi Mattanbaal I envoie 200 soldats à la bataille de Qarqar (853 av. J.-C.) dans une coalition contre Salmanazar III. La réduction des territoires vaincus en province assyrienne (de Sumur) sous Teglath-Phalasar III semble couper Arwad de ses dépendances continentales. En 701 av. J.-C., le roi d'Arwad Abdileti paie tribut à Sennachérib et son successeur Mattanbaal II à Assarhaddon. Le roi Yakinlu se révolte contre Assurbanipal, mais il doit se soumettre au roi assyrien qui le remplace par son fils Azibaal.
La domination babylonienne sur les cités phéniciennes a succédé à la domination assyrienne. Les charpentiers d'Arwad étaient renommés dans le domaine de la menuiserie et des constructions navales et étaient employés à la cour de Nabuchodonosor II, roi de Babylone.

Cette cité passe ensuite sous la domination perse et met sa flotte de guerre à la disposition des rois des Perses. Ainsi, lorsque Xerxès Ier affronte les Grecs à la bataille navale de Salamine en 480, la flotte d'Arwad est commandée par son roi Maharbaal. La cité commence à frapper monnaie vers 440 av. J.-C.. À cette époque, Grecs et Phéniciens sont en relation, grâce aux comptoirs grecs installés sur la côte de Syrie du nord et sur la pérée d'Arados, mais aussi grâce aux voyageurs, artistes et savants. Les artisans d'Arwad sont spécialisés en particulier dans les sarcophages en terre cuite, qu'on ne trouve nulle part ailleurs. Son dernier roi de la période perse, Gerashtart (en grec Gérostratos), monte sur le trône en 339. En 333, à l'arrivée d'Alexandre le Grand, il est en mer avec sa flotte pour soutenir le roi des Perses Darius III, mais son fils Abdashtart (en grec Straton) offre l'île d'Arwad et tout son territoire continental au conquérant grec.
La cité passe alors sous domination grecque. Sous les Séleucides, la cité possède un atelier monétaire qui émet des monnaies au nom d'Alexandre jusqu'en 301. Selon certains historiens, elle serait renommée Antioche de Pieria par Antiochos Ier. Elle inaugure une nouvelle ère civique en 259, date à laquelle la royauté traditionnelle disparaît : la ville devient donc cité libre, indépendante du royaume séleucide, et adopte les institutions grecques, avec un corps civique (démos), une boulè et une gérousia. C'est une concession d'Antiochos II, accordée en échange d'une alliance politique et d'une aide. L'hellénisation des Phéniciens à l'époque hellénistique est rapide, à en juger par l'onomastique et par la langue parlée, ce qui est le cas de tous les magistrats d'Arados. La ville possède d'ailleurs un gymnase, symbole même du mode de vie hellénique et du goût pour les concours athlétiques. Dans l'arrière-pays, Arados gère, à la fin de l'époque hellénistique, le sanctuaire de Zeus Baitokaikè.
À l'époque romaine, Arados soutient Pompée contre Jules César puis résiste farouchement à Marc Antoine venu en Syrie pour y trouver de l'argent: la ville refuse de livrer un Ptolémée, met à mort les envoyés de Marc Antoine et se rallie aux Parthes. Arados est assiégée en -38 par les troupes de Marc Antoine, et doit se rendre, après avoir longuement résisté à la famine et aux épidémies. Les monnaies émises en 35-34 à l'effigie de Marc Antoine et de Fulvie, sa première épouse, ou de Marc Antoine et de Cléopâtre, marquent la fin de son indépendance. La ville ne se relèvera jamais complètement de ces événements.

L'île est mentionnée deux fois dans la Bible (1Maccabées, XV, 22-24.). Elle est également mentionnée dans le Roman pseudo-clémentin, écrit judéo-chrétien qui relate les voyages de l'apôtre Pierre.

Moyen Âge
Lors des Croisades, l'île est prise par les Templiers qui y construisent une forteresse et y installent une force permanente placée sous le commandement du maréchal de l'ordre Barthélemy de Quincy. Ils y restent jusqu'en 1302 où ils sont vaincus par les Mamelouks, faisant de l'île le dernier territoire croisé. Cette chute est une des causes du projet Rex Bellator (Raymond Lulle, 1305)

XXe siècle
Première Guerre mondiale
Pendant la Première Guerre mondiale, la France est en guerre contre l'Empire ottoman, et mène un blocus maritime des côtes syriennes, en concertation avec la Grande-Bretagne. Dès le 1er septembre 1915, la marine française occupe l'île Arouad, point d'appui dans le contexte des opérations navales dans la région. L'île devient aussi un centre de renseignements français. Le lieutenant de vaisseau Trabaud, nommé gouverneur de l'île, dirige l'antenne du Service des Informations de la marine au Levant (SIL). Ce centre de renseignement tourné vers la Syrie a été notamment organisé par Gabriel Auphan, enseigne de vaisseau, lors de son affectation à Rouad entre 1915 et 1916. Le blocus allié des côtes a des effets dramatiques sur les populations civiles de la région, aggravant en particulier la Grande famine du Mont-Liban. Dans la perspective d'une instauration prochaine d'un régime colonial au Levant, l'action du  Service des Informations de la marine au Levant depuis Rouad a permis à la France de préserver une partie de son influence en Orient et de défendre sur le terrain les acquis diplomatiques obtenus grâce aux accords Sykes-Picot. L'île de Rouad est bombardée par les Ottomans en novembre 1917, mais leur attaque est repoussée par les marins français.

Époque contemporaine
En 1945, la France souhaitait conserver l'ile Rouad (Arouad), et y lancer des travaux pour édifier une base militaire, dans un cadre géopolitique, pour conserver une position militaire dans la région, garder une influence culturelle, ce qui impliquait le départ des pêcheurs locaux.
À la suite de pressions des États-Unis, l’île est cédée par la France sans condition à la Syrie, à la fin de 1945, décision confirmée en 1946.
L’île est majoritairement habitée par des musulmans sunnites.

Références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
Jean-Paul Rey-Coquais, Arados et sa pérée aux époques grecque, romaine et byzantine, Éditions Geuthner, Paris 1974.
Josette Elayi et Mohamed R. Haykal, Nouvelles découvertes sur les usages funéraires des Phéniciens d'Arwad, Éditions Gabalda, Paris 1996.
Josette Elayi, Histoire de la Phénicie, Éditions Perrin, Paris 2013.
Marie-Ange Calvet-Sebasti, " Une île romanesque : Arados ", dans Lieux, décors et paysages de l'ancien roman des origines à Byzance, éd. B. Pouderon, CMO 34, Maison de l'Orient et de la Méditerranée, Lyon, 2005, p. 87-99.
Josette Elayi et Alain G. Elayi, Arwad, cité phénicienne du nord, Éditions Gabalda, Paris 2015.
Josette Elayi, Arwad, une île syrienne à la dérive, Éditions Glyphe, Paris 2018.

Articles connexes
Louis Dartige du Fournet (1856-1940)
Musa Dagh
Les Quarante Jours du Musa Dagh

Liens externes

Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste indicative du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire  

(en) Small Islands in the Near East.

 Portail des Phéniciens et de la civilisation carthaginoise   Portail de la Syrie   Portail des îles   Portail de la mer Méditerranée   Portail de l'ordre du Temple



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
QASR AL-HAYR AL-SHARQI
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: desert_castle
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:31:16


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 475
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qasr_al-Hayr_al-Sharqi
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Qasr al-Hayr al-Sharqi (Arabic: قصر الحير الشرقي, lit. 'Eastern al-Hayr Palace or the "Eastern Castle"') is a castle (qasr) in the middle of the Syrian Desert. It was built by the Umayyad caliph Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik in 728-29 CE in an area rich in desert fauna. It was apparently used as a military and hunting outpost. The palace is the counterpart of Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, a nearby castle palace built one year earlier. It is one of the so-called desert castles.

Location
Qasr al-Hayr al-Sharq is 28 kilometres (17 mi) from Al-Sukhnah and 100 kilometres (62 mi) from Sergiopolis (Rusafa), near Bishri Mountain near Palmyran Middle Mountains.

Syrian Civil War
During Syria Civil War, Qasr al-Hayr al-Sharqi was captured by armed groups in 2013, then by ISIS. The Castle has been damaged by looting and vandalism. The visitor house has been burgled. The Syrian Army recaptured the castle on 22 August 2017.

Architecture
Like other Umayyad architectural works, the construction style was influenced by Byzantine and Sasanian architectures.
The palace consists of a large open courtyard surrounded by thick bulwarks and towers guarding the entrances and each corner. The ruins consist of three main components, known as the Small Enclosure, the Large Enclosure and the Outer Enclosure, each of which differ in form and function. The palace(s) contains remnants of rooms, arches and columns which seem to be parts of a huge royal complex, including smaller structures, a reception hall, a mosque, a large bathhouse, gardens, courtyards and a complex water control system. Believed to each be made of a fine-grained limestone with an amber tint, these structures are each complex and visually stunning. In addition to the using stone, these towers exhibit a unique and charming decorative design, using brick and stucco. The bigger palace has been several floors, with a huge gate and many towers. Towers were not built as defensive measures. There were also olive yards. The palaces were supplied with water by nearby Byzantine church by a canal 5,700 metres (6,200 yd) long.
Qasr al-Hayr al-Sharqi was ultimately abandoned at the start of the fourteenth century, resulting in an unprecedented opportunity to study urban life, order and planning during the early Islamic period. The site was excavated in six seasons between 1964 and 1971 by renowned Islamic art historian Oleg Grabar. Excavation of this site provided a unique example for historians and archaeologists of the ecological developments and decorative elements and materials of the area, such as ceramics and coins. Some of the decorated parts have been moved to the National Museum of Damascus while the gate has been reconstructed in the Deir ez-Zor Museum.

World Heritage Status
This site was added to the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List on June 8, 1999, in the Cultural category.

Gallery
See also

Desert castles
List of castles in Syria


== Notes ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 283
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%82%D8%B5%D8%B1_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD%D9%8A%D8%B1_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B4%D8%B1%D9%82%D9%8A
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

قصر الحير الشرقي، يقع القصر في البادية السورية بالقرب من مدينة السخنة حوالي 10 كم شرقا وعن مدينة الرصافة حوالي 100 كم بناه الخليفة الأموي هشام بن عبد الملك عام 110 هجرية ويقع القصر ضمن نطاق مدينة أثرية كاملة كانت منتجعا للخليفة في العصر الأموي.

مكونات القصر
قصر الحير الشرقي عبارة عن قصرين:

قصر الحير الشرقي الكبير ويبلغ طوله حوالي 160 متراً.
قصر الحير الشرقي الصغير ويبلغ طول ضلعه 70 متراً.
يقع القصر عند أقدام جبل البشري حيث يلتقي مع سلسلة الجبال التدمرية في وسط سوريا تقريبا وقد بني القصر على شكل مربع تقريبا وله باحة مركزية كبيرة تحيط بها الدور والغرف المزينة بنقوش وزخارف كثيرة (نقل بعضها إلى متحف دمشق الوطني)

وصف القصر
ويتألف القصر الكبير من طابقين وله بوابة ضخمة محاطة ببرجين دائريين وأبراج وثلاث بوابات في محيط القصر وأبراجه مستديرة وتحيط به البساتين والبيوت الخاصة بالحاشية ودور الخدمة والمخازن والمطابخ والحمامات في مدينة يزيد طول السور الذي المحيط بهذه المدينة على ستة كيلومترات وتحوى المدينة كافة الخدمات إضافة للمباني ومسجد ومعاصر للزيت وصناعة الزجاج وخزانات ماء وقد اكتشفت قناة تمتد لمسافة 5700 متر تنقل المياه إلى داخل أسوار المدينة وإلى القصر من الدير البيزنطي القريب من المكان وتحيط بالقصر البساتين والزراعة، وقد أوضح (هرزفيلد) أحد الأثريين الذين عملوا في الموقع أن بناء المسجد وبعض المرافق قد سبقت بناء القصر ويعد قصر الحير الشرقي مع قصر الحير الغربي الواقع غرب مدينة تدمر نموذج للفن الأموي الذي انتشر في المدن الإسلامية والأندلس بعد ذلك.
وقد زار القصر الكثير من الرحالة والكتاب والمستشرقين وكتب عنه الكثير حيث كتب عنه الكاتب (ألبرت غبرييل) وأطلق علية اسم مدينة في الصحراء ووصف منشآته وأبنيته وأسوار القصر وأسوار وأبراج المدينة الممتدة.

انظر أيضا
قصر الحير الغربي

مراجع
وصلات خارجية
قصر الحير الشرقي - وزارة السياحة / سوريا


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 578
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qasr_el-Heir_ech-Charqi
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Qasr el-Heir ech-Charqi (en arabe : قصر الحير الشرقي (Qaṣr al-Ḥayr aš-Šarqī), « château de l'enclos de l'est ») est une place forte datant de la dynastie des Omeyyades, située à 80 km à l'est de Palmyre et à 80 km au sud de Deir ez-Zor, en Syrie. La précision « de l'est  » permet de le distinguer de son homonyme Qasr el-Heir el-Gharbi (de l'ouest).

Histoire
Bâti à la période omeyyade vers le VIIIe siècle, en 728 selon une inscription trouvée, donc sous le règne du calife Hicham. En pleine steppe du désert, à l'orée d'un passage entre deux montagnes, ce lieu bénéficie d'un microclimat favorable à la construction d'un château et la vie dans ce dernier.
On trouve différentes théories sur la présence de châteaux dans le désert. Certains[Qui ?] considèrent que la petite enceinte serait un caravansérail servant d'étape aux caravanes de marchands. Ceux-ci pouvaient entrer avec les animaux et les denrées, qui disposaient, apparemment, de chaque côté de l'entrée d'espaces de stockage, comme des entrepôts. Cette théorie est assez probable, d'autant plus qu'il n'y a qu'une entrée sur la petite enceinte: on y fait entrer des richesses donc elle se doit d'être moins accessible pour éviter des éventuels brigands.
Pour d'autres[Qui ?] la petite enceinte correspondrait au château tandis que la grande regrouperait les habitations des personnes habitant, gardant, administrant le lieu et produisant l'huile d'olive, ainsi que celles qui ne sont que de passage.
Des fouilles archéologiques dirigée par une équipe française y sont menée de 1936 à 1938. Une autre est effectuée en 2004.

Architecture
L'ensemble présente deux enceintes.
La petite enceinte de forme carrée mesure environ 70 mètres de côtés, avec deux forte tours semi-circulaires servant de contrefort sur chaque côté, et une tour circulaire à chaque extrémité. L'entrée se trouve sur le côté ouest, et elle est marquée par une grande porte flanquée de deux puissantes tours semi-circulaires.
Construite autour d’une cour centrale entourée d'un portique, qui donne sur des pièces appelées bayt (littéralement, « maison »). Il s'agit de pièces utilisées comme appartements. Dans la maison du Prophète à Médine, les chambres des femmes donnant directement sur la cour étaient appelées bayt, et c’est un principe identique que l'on retrouve ici, inspiré des architectures du désert du Hedjaz. L'édifice est doté d'un étage.
On retrouve également le principe du bassin au centre de la cour.

Une grande enceinte: 167 m de côté. Murs à contreforts avec tours rondes d'angles. Entrée côté ouest, dotée d'un portail monumental. Il y a une mosquée dans l'un des angles.
Chaque unité de vie (12) possède son propre espace ouvert, à la manière d'un patio, et est totalement indépendante des autres. C'est en cela que la plupart des complexes des châteaux du désert sont considérés comme des "micro-villes".[réf. nécessaire]
Sur le côté Est on a retrouvé un moulin et un pressoir à olive pour produire de l'huile, qui devait donc être commercialisée; on a également retrouvé une inscription Madîna "la ville", qui laisse penser que l'endroit pouvait être dénommé ainsi.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Olivia R. Constable, Housing the Stranger in the Mediterranean World: Lodging, Trade, and Travel in Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003, p. 56
« Un Château du désert : Qasr al-Hayr ach-Charqi » sur unesco.org [lire en ligne (page consultée le 7 octobre 2021)]
 Portail de l’archéologie   Portail des châteaux   Portail de la Syrie   Portail de la protection du patrimoine   Portail du haut Moyen Âge



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
QASR AL-HAYR AL-GHARBI
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: desert_castle
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:31:24


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,469
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qasr_al-Hayr_al-Gharbi
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi (Arabic: قصر الحير الغربي) is a Syrian desert castle or qasr located 80 km south-west of Palmyra on the Damascus road. The castle is a twin palace of Qasr al-Hayr al-Sharqi, built by the Umayyad caliph Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik in 727 CE.  It was built in the Umayyad architectural style. As the complex was believed to be an estate owned by someone of wealth, it is no surprise that some decorations for its opulent owners may be found within the remains of the palace. Some of the items found within include richly decorated floor frescoes, stucco walls, and figural reliefs. Many decorations and artwork from the complex are kept at the National Museum in Damascus. Like other desert palaces, Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi was not Hisham's primary residence. The structure served as a secondary lodging for the Caliph, while the expanse of flat desert land surrounding it was used for leisurely activities such as hunting and racing. Noblemen other than the Caliph would have stayed in tents around the palace when they visited.

Description
Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi is one of a number of Umayyad desert castles in the Syrian/Jordanian region. The site originally consisted of a palace complex, a bath house, industrial buildings for the production of olive oil, an irrigated garden and another building which scholars suggest may have been a caravanserai. Over the entrance is an inscription which declares that it was built by Hisham in the year 727, a claim that is borne out by the architectural style.
It was used as an eye of the king during the Umayyad era, to control the movement of the desert tribes and to act as a barrier against marauding tribes, as well as serving a hunting lodge. It is one of the most luxurious examples of a desert palace. Later it was utilized by the Ayyubids and the Mamelukes but was abandoned permanently after the Mongol invasions.
The palace was built from mudbricks atop a masonry base, at the time of excavation the only part visible was the gateway. The gateway is composed of the doorway framed by two large cylindrical structures, two small windows sit around the halfway point between the doors and the top of the gateway and the whole structure is decorated with arches and geometric patterns. Most of the mud brick degraded into the surrounding sand, but the masonry base indicates where the walls of the palace once stood. The walls formed a large rectangle and in addition to the gate there are three cylindrical towers at the corners of the structure and on the fourth stands the monastery tower. The palace was two stories high and there is evidence that there were two staircases, both levels were likely identical, divided into six sections each with a hallway, several rooms, and a lavatory.

The castle is quadrangular in outline with 70-metre (230 ft) sides. The central doorway to the castle is very attractive and has been moved to the National Museum of Damascus to be used as the entrance. Its semi-cylindrical towers on the sides of the doorway, columns, and the geometric shapes mirrored a blend of Persian, Byzantine and Arab architecture.
Little of the original castle remains; however, the reservoir to collect water from Harbaka dam, a bath and a khan are still visible. The gateway is preserved as a façade in the National Museum of Damascus.

Art found within the complex
Although the site of the complex features degrading architecture, several artistic works have been located, including a stucco wall and a fresco floor. Similar types of art can be found in Roman architecture, but the majority of works within the complex are dated in the Umayyad period, not Roman, excluding a few constructs within the waterworks. Many of the pieces found are vague or unclear whether they are based on an actual figure.
One piece of artwork can possibly be identified, among the reliefs discovered in a 1936 excavation of the complex, a figural relief of man, now missing from the torso and above. This finely adorned figure in Persian dress and jewelry may represent Hisham, the Caliph who commissioned the palace to be built. The relief's clothing is similar in style to various artworks created in the Sassanian period, found on dinnerware and household items. This continuation of style suggests that pre-Islamic artwork may have been an inspiration for the Umayyad palace. There is also evidence that the relief would have been painted rather than left in simple bare stone. This attempt to create artwork inspired by previous cultures is not uncommon in Islamic works, especially in the Umayyad period, as imagery depicting Sasanian mythological creatures such as senmurv's can be found at Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi as well as more well-known complexes such as Khirbat al-Mafjar.
Two floor frescos were also recovered from the site. One features a hunter, similar to Sassanian depictions of kings during royal hunts, as well as depictions of two court minstrels playing musical instruments, a nai (a woodwind instrument) and an oud (a string instrument), beneath a pair of ornamented arches. The hunter is dressed in Sassanian-style fashion; his head-scarf flying behind him, and his bow and arrow are drawn tight for the shot. The human figures at the top and bottom of this floor painting are shown in a realistic way, adapted from Greco-Roman models. Unlike other works found within the palace, this fresco does not a feature an insignia representing the royal family. Several scholars suggest that this fresco reflect's the Caliph’s choice to shift the focus of the empire to the East instead of the West, particularly following Muslim attempts to conquer Constantinople. This is perhaps why the Caliph chose to embrace Sassanian imperial heritage as models for asserting power. This painting was originally on the floor of a reception hall, and there are traces of a possible round column that once stood on top of it.
The second floor painting, painted with the fresco secco technique, was also originally in the reception hall of the west wing of Qusayr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, and measures 5.21m long by 4.43 m wide. It depicts the classical female personification of the Earth, known as Ge or Gaia, in a central red medallion, which dominates the composition. Gaia looks directly at viewers, and is wearing a necklace around her neck, and she is holding up a cloth in her hands that holds fruit. The painting appears to draw inspiration from Byzantine mosaics, of which painting is a less time consuming and costly art form. Above her are nearly symmetrical hybrid creatures (Greek centaurs) who are holding a spear in one hand and motioning towards Gaia with the other, drawing our focus to her. All of the figures are surrounded by scrolling tendrils and enclosed by a red rectangular border. Outside of this border is a band of circular shapes, which mimic the band surrounding Gaia, vines (Roman acanthus) intertwining, and what appear to be grapes. Despite the right side of the floor being worn away, the piece appears to be almost symmetrical based on the outlines left behind. These shapes are then enclosed by a thin black rectangle and ultimately a red border, giving this painting a carpet-like appearance. Although few examples survive from this period, the importance of textiles in the Islamic world is suggested in this painting, and the influence of Greek, Byzantine, and Roman culture is made clear in the layout and imagery of the piece. In the lower areas of this painting there are animals including cranes, foxes, and a dog. It was quite common for Umayyad and early Abbasid artists to reflect Greco-Roman conventions, which is evident in this painting. The imagery in this painting, such as Gaia holding the fruit in a cloth and the centaurs with weapons may reflect the common pursuits of those living in desert castles, such as feasting and hunting. Since she is a direct reference to the Earth and heaven, she might also serve as a personification of abundance and the agricultural fertility that rulers such as caliph Hisham "interpreted as a divine portent of their political legitimacy."
The desert castles like Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi were used as temporary retreats, sites to display status, and for Umayyad rulers to entertain their guests. Floor paintings like these helped create an atmosphere of sophistication and luxury for whoever saw them.
Both paintings have been removed from their original location in Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi and are now at the National Museum of Damascus.

See also
Desert castles
Islamic art
Islamic architecture
List of castles in Syria
Umayyad architecture

References
External links

"Qasr Al Hir". Syria Gate. Archived from the original on 2007-11-18.
Genequand, Denis (2013). "Some Thoughts on Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, its Dam, its Monastery and the Ghassanids". Levant. 38 (1): 63–84. doi:10.1179/lev.2006.38.1.63. ISSN 0075-8914.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 34
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%82%D8%B5%D8%B1_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD%D9%8A%D8%B1_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%BA%D8%B1%D8%A8%D9%8A
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

قصر الحير الغربي هو قصر أثري يقع نحو 60 كم جنوب غرب تدمر.
بني سنة 109 هـ / 727 م في عهد هشام بن عبد الملك.

انظر أيضا
قصر الحير الشرقي


== المراجع ==



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
TELL BRAK
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:31:32


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 5,151
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tell_Brak
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tell Brak (Nagar, Nawar) was an ancient city in Syria; it is one the earliest known cities in the world. Its remains constitute a tell located in the Upper Khabur region, near the modern village of Tell Brak, 50 kilometers north-east of Al-Hasaka city, Al-Hasakah Governorate. The city's original name is unknown. During the second half of the third millennium BC, the city was known as Nagar and later on, Nawar.
Starting as a small settlement in the seventh millennium BC, Tell Brak's urbanization began in the late 5th millennium BCE and evolved during the fourth millennium BC into one of the biggest cities in Upper Mesopotamia, and interacted with the cultures of southern Mesopotamia. The city shrank in size at the beginning of the third millennium BC with the end of Uruk period, before expanding again around 2600 BC, when it became known as Nagar, and was the capital of a regional kingdom that controlled the Khabur river valley. Nagar was destroyed around 2300 BC, and came under the rule of the Akkadian Empire, followed by a period of independence as a Hurrian city-state, before contracting at the beginning of the second millennium BC. Nagar prospered again by the 19th century BC, and came under the rule of different regional powers. In c. 1500 BC, Tell Brak was a center of Mitanni before being destroyed by Assyria around 1300 BC. The city never regained its former importance, remaining as a small settlement, and abandoned at some points of its history, until disappearing from records during the early Abbasid era.
Different peoples inhabited the city, including the Halafians, Semites and the Hurrians. Tell Brak was a religious center from its earliest periods; its famous Eye Temple is unique in the Fertile Crescent, and its main deity, Belet Nagar, was revered in the entire Khabur region, making the city a pilgrimage site. The culture of Tell Brak was defined by the different civilizations that inhabited it, and it was famous for its glyptic style, equids and glass. When independent, the city was ruled by a local assembly or by a monarch. Tell Brak was a trade center due to its location between Anatolia, the Levant and southern Mesopotamia. It was excavated by Max Mallowan in 1937, then regularly by different teams between 1979 and 2011, when the work stopped due to the Syrian Civil War.

Name
The original name of the city is unknown; Tell Brak is the current name of the tell. East of the mound lies a dried lake named "Khatuniah" which was recorded as "Lacus Beberaci" (the lake of Brak) in the Roman map Tabula Peutingeriana. The lake was probably named after Tell Brak which was the nearest camp in the area. The name "Brak" might therefore be an echo of the most ancient name.

During the third millennium BC, the city was known as "Nagar", which might be of Semitic origin and mean a "cultivated place". The name "Nagar" ceased occurring following the Old Babylonian period, however, the city continued to exist as Nawar, under the control of Hurrian state of Mitanni. Hurrian kings of Urkesh took the title "King of Urkesh and Nawar" in the third millennium BC.

Alternative theories
Although there is general view that the third millennium BC Nawar is identical with Nagar, some scholars, such as Jesper Eidem, doubt this. Those scholars opt for a city closer to Urkesh which was also called Nawala/Nabula as the intended Nawar.

History
Early settlement
In Brak Period A (c. 6500–5900 BC), the earliest small settlement is dated to the proto Halaf culture c. 6500 BC. Many objects dated to that period were discovered including the Halaf pottery.
In Brak Period B (c. 5900–5200 BC), the Halaf Culture  Halaf culture transformed into Period C (c. 5200–4400 BC) Northern Ubaid, and many Ubaid materials were found in Tell Brak. Excavations and surface survey of the site and its surroundings, unearthed a large platform of patzen bricks that dates to late Ubaid, and revealed that Tell Brak developed as an urban center slightly earlier than better known cities of southern Mesopotamia, such as Uruk.

Late Chalcolithic
The first city
In southern Mesopotamia, the original Ubaid culture evolved into the Uruk period. The people of the southern Uruk period used military and commercial means to expand the civilization. In Northern Mesopotamia, the post Ubaid period is designated Late Chalcolithic / Northern Uruk period, during which, Tell Brak started to expand.

Brak Period E
Tell Brak Period E (c. 4200–3900 BC; Late Chalcolithic 2; Northern Early Uruk Period) witnessed the building of the City's Walls, and expansion beyond the mound to form a Lower Town, becoming a proto-urban city with a size of c. 55 hectares.
Comparison can be made with Hamoukar in LC1-2 period, where the early urban settlement has been described as "a vast low or flat scatter of pottery and obsidian". The population density at both settlements was very low at that stage, so they appeared more like a scattering of various small sites in the same area: "... new indicators of social complexity appeared simultaneously with dramatic settlement expansion at Brak and Khirbat al-Fakhar [Hamoukar], although not in the form known from later periods of northern Mesopotamian history. Both were extensive "proto-urban" settlements of low or variable density, with few other parallels elsewhere in the Near East." Another example is, Khirbat al-Fakhar already reached a massive size of 300 ha, or larger than the contemporary Uruk, itself.
Area TW of the tell (Archaeologists divided Tell Brak into areas designated with Alphabetic letters. See the map for Tell Brak's areas) revealed the remains of a monumental building with two meters thick walls and a basalt threshold. In front of the building, a sherd paved street was discovered, leading to the northern entrance of the city. Area TW covered an area of nearly 600 square meters up to a depth of 10 meters. A number of beveled rim bowls diagnostic of the Uruk period were found in the TW area.

Brak Period F
Tell Brak Period F can be subdivided into two phases early (c. 3800–3600 BC; Late Chaltolihic 3) and late (c. 3600–3000 BC; Late Chaltolihic 4).
In the Early Brak Period F (c. 3800–3600 BC; LC3), the early city-state continued to expand and reached the size of 130 hectares. Four mass graves, mainly sub-adults and young adults were discovered in the submound, Tell Majnuna (built entirely of rubbish over two centuries), north of the main tell, and they suggest that the process of urbanization was accompanied by internal social stress, and an increase in the organization of warfare. The first half of period F (designated LC3), saw the erection of the Eye Temple, which was named for the thousands of small alabaster "Eye idols" and "Spectacle-topped idols" figurines discovered in it. Those idols were also found in area TW.
In Late Brak Period F (c. 3600–3000 BC; LC4) interatction with Southern Mesopotamia increased, and an Urukean colony was established in the city. With the end of Uruk culture c 3000 BC, Tell Brak's Urukean colony was abandoned and deliberately leveled by its occupants.

Brak Period G & H
The Brak Period G (c. 3200–3000 BC; LC5), saw the site contracting during the following periods H and J, and became limited to the mound. In the Brak Period H (c. 3000–2900 BC; Post-Uruk), evidence exists for an interaction with the Mesopotamian south, represented by the existence of materials similar to the ones produced during the southern Jemdet Nasr period.

Early Bronze
Brak Period J & K
During the Brak Period J (2900–2600 BC) and K (2600–2400 BC) the city remained a small settlement during the Ninevite 5 period, with a small temple and associated sealing activities.

Kingdom of Nagar
Around c. 2600 BC, a large administrative building was built and the city expanded out of the tell again. The revival is connected with the Kish civilization, and the city was named "Nagar". Amongst the important buildings dated to the kingdom, is an administrative building or temple named the "Brak Oval", located in area TC. The building had a curved exterior wall reminiscent of the Khafajah "Oval Temple" in central Mesopotamia. However, aside from the wall, the comparison between the two buildings in terms of architecture is difficult, as each building follows a different plan.
The oldest references to Nagar comes from Mari and tablets discovered at Nabada. However, the most important source on Nagar comes from the archives of Ebla. Most of the texts record the ruler of Nagar using his title "En", without mentioning a name. However a text from Ebla mentions Mara-Il, a king of Nagar; thus, he is the only ruler known by name for pre-Akkadian Nagar and ruled a little more than a generation before the kingdom's destruction.
At its height, Nagar encompassed most of the southwestern half of the Khabur Basin, and was a diplomatic and political equal of the Eblaite and Mariote states. The kingdom included at least 17 subordinate cities, such as Hazna, and most importantly Nabada, which was a city-state annexed by Nagar, and served as a provincial capital. Nagar was involved in the wide diplomatic network of Ebla, and the relations between the two kingdoms involved both confrontations and alliances. A text from Ebla mentions a victory of Ebla's king (perhaps Irkab-Damu) over Nagar. However, a few years later, a treaty was concluded, and the relations progressed toward a dynastic marriage between princess Tagrish-Damu of Ebla, and prince Ultum-Huhu, Nagar's monarch's son.
Nagar was defeated by Mari in year seven of the Eblaite vizier Ibrium's term, causing the blockage of trade routes between Ebla and southern Mesopotamia via upper Mesopotamia. Later, Ebla's king Isar-Damu concluded an alliance with Nagar and Kish against Mari, and the campaign was headed by the Eblaite vizier Ibbi-Sipish, who led the combined armies to victory in a battle near Terqa. Afterwards, the alliance attacked the rebellious Eblaite vassal city of Armi. Ebla was destroyed approximately three years after Terqa's battle, and soon after, Nagar followed in c. 2300 BC. Large parts of the city were burned, an act attributed either to Mari, or Sargon of Akkad.

Akkadian period
Following its destruction, Nagar was rebuilt by the Akkadian empire, to form a center of the provincial administration. The city included the whole tell and a lower town at the southern edge of the mound. Two public buildings were built during the early Akkadian periods, one complex in area SS, and another in area FS. The building of area FS included its own temple and might have served as a caravanserai, being located near the northern gate of the city. The temple was dedicated to the god Šamagan, god of animals of the steppe. The early Akkadian monarchs were occupied with internal conflicts, and Tell Brak was temporarily abandoned by Akkad at some point preceding the reign of Naram-Sin. The abandonment might be connected with an environmental event, that caused the desertification of the region.
The destruction of Nagar's kingdom created a power vacuum in the Upper Khabur. The Hurrians, formerly concentrated in Urkesh, took advantage of the situation to control the region as early as Sargon's latter years. Tell Brak was known as "Nawar" for the Hurrians, and kings of Urkesh took the title "King of Urkesh and Nawar", first attested in the seal of Urkesh's king Atal-Shen.
The use of the title continued during the reigns of Atal-Shen's successors, Tupkish and Tish-Atal, who ruled only in Urkesh. The Akkadians under Naram-Sin incorporated Nagar firmly into their empire. The most important Akkadian building in the city is called the "Palace of Naram-Sin", which had parts of it built over the original Eye Temple. Despite its name, the palace is closer to a fortress, as it was more of a fortified depot for the storage of collected tribute rather than a residential seat. The palace was burned during Naram-Sin's reign, perhaps by a Lullubi attack, and the city was burned toward the end of the Akkadian period c. 2193 BC, probably by the Gutians.

Post-Akkadian kingdom
In Brak Period N, the Fall of the Akkadian Empire (c. 2154 BC), saw Nagar becoming a center of an independent Hurrian dynasty, evidenced by the discovery of a seal, recording the name of king Talpus-Atili of Nagar, who ruled during or slightly after the reign of Shar-Kali-Sharri (r. 2217–2193 BC).

Ur III Dynasty?
The view that Tell Brak came under the control of Ur III is refused, and evidence exists for a Hurrian rebuilding of Naram-Sin's palace, erroneously attributed by Max Mallowan to Ur-Nammu of Ur. Period N saw a reduction in the city's size, with public buildings being abandoned, and the lower town evacuated. Few short lived houses were built in area CH during period N, and although greatly reduced in size, archaeology provided evidence for continued occupation in the city, instead of abandonment.

Middle Bronze
Mari Period
During Brak Period P (c. 1820–1550 BC; MB II), Nagar was densely populated in the northern ridge of the tell. The city came under the rule of Mari, and was the site of a decisive victory won by Yahdun-Lim of Mari over Shamshi-Adad I of Assyria. Nagar lost its importance and came under the rule of Kahat in the 18th century BC.

Late Bronze
Mitanni Period
During period Q, Tell Brak was an important trade city in the Mitanni state. A two-story palace was built c. 1500 BC in the northern section of the tell, in addition to an associated temple. However, the rest of the tell was not occupied, and a lower town extended to the north but is now all but destroyed through modern agriculture. Two Mitannian legal documents, bearing the names of kings Artashumara and Tushratta (c. 1380–1345 BC), were recovered from the city.

Assyrian period
Following the death of king Tushratta, the Mitanni Empire collapsed. In the west the Hittites came and created a vassal buffer state in the region of Hanigalbat, while the Assyrians later took territory from the east. Tell Brak was destroyed between c.1300 and 1275 BC, in two waves, first at the hands of the Assyrian king Adad-Nirari I (r. 1305–1274 BC), then by his successor Shalmaneser I.

Iron Age
Little evidence of an occupation on the tell exists following the destruction of the Mitannian city, however, a series of small villages existed in the lower town during the Assyrian periods. The remains of a Hellenistic settlement were discovered on a nearby satellite tell, to the northwestern edge of the main tell. However, excavations recovered no ceramics of the Parthian-Roman or Byzantine-Sasanian periods, although sherds dating to those periods are noted. In the middle of the first millennium AD, a fortified building was erected in the northeastern lower town. The building was dated by Antoine Poidebard to the Justinian era (sixth century AD), on the basis of its architecture. The last occupation period of the site was during the early Abbasid Caliphate's period, when a canal was built to provide the town with water from the nearby Jaghjagh River.

Society
People and language
The Halafians were the indigenous people of Neolithic northern Syria, who later adopted the southern Ubaidian culture. Contact with the Mesopotamian south increased during the early and middle Northern Uruk period, and southern people moved to Tell Brak in the late Uruk period, forming a colony, which produced a mixed society. The Urukean colony was abandoned by the colonists toward the end of the fourth millennium BC, leaving the indigenous Tell Brak a much contracted city. The pre-Akkadian kingdom's population was Semitic, and spoke its own East Semitic dialect of the Eblaite language used in Ebla and Mari. The Nagarite dialect is closer to the dialect of Mari rather than that of Ebla.
No Hurrian names are recorded in the pre-Akkadian period, although the name of prince Ultum-Huhu is difficult to understand as Semitic. During the Akkadian period, both Semitic and Hurrian names were recorded, as the Hurrians appear to have taken advantage of the power vacuum caused by the destruction of the pre-Akkadian kingdom, in order to migrate and expand in the region. The post-Akkadian period Tell Brak had a strong Hurrian element, and Hurrian named rulers, although the region was also inhabited by Amorite tribes. A number of the Amorite Yaminite tribes settled the surroundings of Tell Brak during the reign of Zimri-Lim of Mari, and each group used its own language (Hurrian and Amorite languages). Tell Brak was a center of the Hurrian-Mitannian empire, which had Hurrian as its official language. However, Akkadian was the region's international language, evidenced by the post-Akkadian and Mitannian eras tablets, discovered at Tell Brak and written in Akkadian.

Religion
The findings in the Eye Temple indicate that Tell Brak is among the earliest sites of organized religion in northern Mesopotamia. It is unknown to which deity the Eye Temple was dedicated, and the "Eyes" figurines appears to be votive offerings to that unknown deity. The temple was probably dedicated for the Sumerian Innana or the Semitic Ishtar; Michel Meslin hypothesized that the "Eyes" figurines were a representation of an all-seeing female deity.
During the pre-Akkadian kingdom's era, Hazna, an old cultic center of northern Syria, served as a pilgrimage center for Nagar. The Eye Temple remained in use, but as a small shrine, while the goddess Belet Nagar became the kingdom's paramount deity. The temple of Belet Nagar is not identified but probably lies beneath the Mitannian palace. The Eblaite deity Kura was also venerated in Nagar, and the monarchs are attested visiting the temple of the Semitic deity Dagon in Tuttul. During the Akkadian period, the temple in area FS was dedicated to the Sumerian god Shakkan, the patron of animals and countrysides. Tell Brak was an important religious Hurrian center, and the temple of Belet Nagar retained its cultic importance in the entire region until the early second millennium BC.

Culture
Northern Mesopotamia evolved independently from the south during the Late Chalcolithic / early and middle Northern Uruk (4000–3500 BC). This period was characterized by a strong emphasis on holy sites, among which, the Eye Temple was the most important in Tell Brak. The building containing "Eyes" idols in area TW was wood paneled, whose main room had been lined with wooden panels. The building also contained the earliest known semi columned facade, which is a character that will be associated with temples in later periods.
By late Northern Uruk and especially after 3200 BC, northern Mesopotamia came under the full cultural dominance of the southern Uruk culture, which affected Tell Brak's architecture and administration. The southern influence is most obvious in the level named the "Latest Jemdet Nasr" of the Eye Temple, which had southern elements such as cone mosaics. The Uruk presence was peaceful as it is first noted in the context of feasting; commercial deals during that period were traditionally ratified through feasting. The excavations in area TW revealed feasting to be an important local habit, as two cooking facilities, large amounts of grains, skeletons of animals, a domed backing oven and barbequing fire pits were discovered. Among the late Uruk materials found at Tell Brak is a standard text for educated scribes (the "Standard Professions" text), part of the standardized education taught in the 3rd millennium BC over a wide area of Syria and Mesopotamia.

The pre-Akkadian kingdom was famed for its acrobats, who were in demand in Ebla and trained local Eblaite entertainers. The kingdom also had its own local glyptic style called the "Brak Style", which was distinct from the southern sealing variants, employing soft circled shapes and sharpened edges. The Akkadian administration had little effect on the local administrative traditions and sealing style, and Akkadian seals existed side by side with the local variant. The Hurrians employed the Akkadian style in their seals, and Elamite seals were discovered, indicating an interaction with the western Iranian Plateau.
Tell Brak provided great knowledge on the culture of Mitanni, which produced glass using sophisticated techniques, that resulted in different varieties of multicolored and decorated shapes. Samples of the elaborate Nuzi ware were discovered, in addition to seals that combine distinctive Mitannian elements with the international motifs of that period.
Prior to the Nuzi ware, the predominant ceramic tradition at Brak is known as Khabur ware. Nuzi ware retains some shapes of Khabur ware, as well as some of its surface decorations. The fourth and last phase of Khabur ware (around 1500 BC) is generally contemporaneous with Nuzi ware. Both of them occur in parallel for some time at Brak before the Khabur ware disappears.

Wagons
Seals from Tell Brak and Nabada dated to the pre-Akkadian kingdom, revealed the use of four-wheeled wagons and war carriages. Excavation in area FS recovered clay models of equids and wagons dated to the Akkadian and post-Akkadian periods. The models provide information about the types of wagons used during that period (2350–2000 BC), and they include four wheeled vehicles and two types of two wheeled vehicles; the first is a cart with fixed seats and the second is a cart where the driver stands above the axle. The chariots were introduced during the Mitanni era, and none of the pre-Mitanni carriages can be considered chariots, as they are mistakenly described in some sources.

Government
The first city had the characteristics of large urban centers, such as monumental buildings, and seems to have been ruled by a kinship based assembly, headed by elders. The pre-Akkadian kingdom was decentralized, and the provincial center of Nabada was ruled by a council of elders, next to the king's representative. The Nagarite monarchs had to tour their kingdom regularly in order to assert their political control. During the early Akkadian period, Nagar was administrated by local officials. However, central control was tightened and the number of Akkadian officials increased, following the supposed environmental event that preceded the construction of Naram-Sin's palace. The post-Akkadian Nagar was a city-state kingdom, that gradually lost its political importance during the early second millennium BC, as no evidence for a king dating to that period exists.

Rulers of Tell Brak
Economy
Throughout its history, Tell Brak was an important trade center; it was an entrepot of obsidian trade during the Chalcolithic, as it was situated on the river crossing between Anatolia, the Levant and southern Mesopotamia. The countryside was occupied by smaller towns, villages and hamlets, but the city's surroundings were empty within three kilometers. This was probably due to the intensive cultivation in the immediate hinterland, in order to sustain the population. The city manufactured different objects, including chalices made of obsidian and white marble, faience, flint tools and shell inlays. However, evidence exists for a slight shift in production of goods toward manufacturing objects desired in the south, following the establishment of the Uruk colony.
Trade was also an important economic activity for the pre-Akkadian kingdom of Nagar, which had Ebla and Kish as major partners. The kingdom produced glass, wool, and was famous for breeding and trading in the Kunga, a hybrid of a jenny (a female donkey) and a male Syrian wild ass. Tell Brak remained an important commercial center during the Akkadian period, and was one of Mitanni's main trade cities. Many objects were manufactured in Mitannian Tell Brak, including furniture made of ivory, wood and bronze, in addition to glass. The city provided evidence for the international commercial contacts of Mitanni, including Egyptian, Hittite and Mycenaean objects, some of which were produced in the region to satisfy the local taste.

Equids
The kungas of pre-Akkadian Nagar were used for drawing the carriages of kings before the domestication of the horse, and a royal procession included up to fifty animals. The kungas of Nagar were in great demand in the Eblaite empire; they cost two kilos of silver, fifty times the price of a donkey, and were imported regularly by the monarchs of Ebla to be used as transport animals and gifts for allied cities. The horse was known in the region during the third millennium BC, but was not used as a draught animal before c. 18th century BC.

Donkey burials
Burials of a donkey and a dog were found at Tell Brak as early as the Akkadian period (2580–2455 BCE). They were not accompanied by human interment. Six donkey skeletons and one canine skeleton were found; they were buried below a temple courtyard.
Also, later, during the Babylonian period, they were found at Tell Ababra in Iraq. Tell Ababra was located in the Hamrin Basin area of Iraq, which is now covered by Lake Hamrin.
At Tel 'Akko (near Acre, Israel), a donkey was found buried together with a dog, and a part of the upper jawbone of a pig. The burial was dated at the end of the Middle Bronze Age.
Similar sacrifices of donkeys were also found in large numbers at Tell el-Dab'a in the Nile Delta of Egypt dating to the Middle Bronze Age. Also, similar sacrifices were found at Tel Haror.

Site
Soundings were conducted in 1930 by Antoine Poidebard although little was published. After a survey of the area in 1934, Tell Brak was excavated for three seasons by the British archaeologist Sir Max Mallowan, husband of Agatha Christie, in 1937 and 1938. The artifacts from Mallowan's excavations are now preserved in the Ashmolean Museum, National Museum of Aleppo and the British Museum's collection; the latter contain the Tell Brak Head dating to c. 3500–3300 BC. Two small cuneiform tablets were found and a half dozen fragments, all in the Akkadian period script.
A team from the Institute of Archaeology of the University of London, led by David and Joan Oates, worked in the tell for 14 seasons between 1976 and 1993. Finds included several Uruk Period numerical tablets and a number of cuneiform tablets and inscriptions. After 1993, excavations were conducted by a number of field directors under the general guidance of David (until 2004) and Joan Oates. Those directors included Roger Matthews (in 1994–1996), for the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research of the University of Cambridge; Geoff Emberling (in 1998–2002) and Helen McDonald (in 2000–2004), for the British Institute for the Study of Iraq and the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Finds included a large cache of carnelian, gold, silver, and lapis lazuli beads, late 3rd millennium arrowheads, stone maceheads, a range of ceramic wares, and an alabaster statuette of a seated bear.

In 2006, Augusta McMahon became field director, also sponsored by the British Institute for the Study of Iraq. A regional archaeological field survey in a 20 km (12 mi) radius around Brak was supervised by Henry T. Wright (in 2002–2005). The survey data was combined with LANDSAT and 1960s era CORONA satellite images as well as historical photographs. Many of the finds from the excavations at Tell Brak are on display in the Deir ez-Zor Museum. A number of Proto-Literate clay tokens were found at the site, mainly in Uruk leveling fill but in one case in a stratified context. Most of the finds were pellets but also cones, discs, and ovioid bullae. In Late Uruk fill a number of large stone spheres and polished teardrops were found.
The most recent excavations took place in the spring of 2011, but archaeological work is currently suspended due to the ongoing Syrian Civil War. According to the Syrian authorities, the camp of archaeologists was looted, along with the tools and ceramics kept in it. The site changed hands between the different combatants, mainly the Kurdish People's Protection Units and the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. In early 2015, Tell Brak was taken by the Kurdish forces.

See also
Chagar Bazar
Cities of the Ancient Near East
Hamoukar
Tall Al-Hamidiya
Tell Aqab
Tell Chuera
Tell Leilan
Tell Mozan

References
Informational notes

Citations

Bibliography

Further reading
General

Biga, M. G., "The Marriage of Eblaite Princess Tagrisˇ-Damu with a Son of Nagar's King", Subartu, IV, 2, pp. 17–22, 1998
Oates, Joan, and David Oates, "An open gate: Cities of the fourth millennium BC (Tell Brak 1997)." Cambridge Archaeological Journal 7.2, pp. 287–297, 1997
Oates, David; Oates, Joan (1989). "Akkadian Buildings at Tell Brak". Iraq. 51: 193–211. doi:10.2307/4200303. ISSN 0021-0889. JSTOR 4200303. S2CID 162449952.
Oates, Joan (1982j). "Some Late Early Dynastic III Pottery from Tell Brak". Iraq. 44 (2): 205–219. doi:10.2307/4200163. ISSN 0021-0889. JSTOR 4200163. S2CID 163191059.
Wilhelm, G. (1991). "A Hurrian Letter from Tell Brak" (PDF). Iraq. 53: 159–168. doi:10.2307/4200345. ISSN 0021-0889. JSTOR 4200345. S2CID 162464364.
[2] Ur, Jason A., "Urban form at Tell Brak across three millennia.", in Preludes to Urbanism: Studies in the Late Chalcolithic of Mesopotamia in Honour of Joan Oates, Archaeopress, Oxford, 2014
Excavation Related

Ambers, J., "Radiocarbon results from Tell Brak", Iraq 55, pp. 198–199, 1993
Bowman, S. G. E., and J. C. Ambers, "Radiocarbon Dates for Tell Brak, 1987", Iraq, vol. 51, pp. 213–15, 1989
Clutton-Brock, Juliet, "A Dog and a Donkey Excavated at Tell Brak", Iraq, vol. 51, pp. 217–24, 1989
Clutton-Brock, Juliet, and Sophie Davies, "More Donkeys from Tell Brak", Iraq, vol. 55, pp. 209–21, 1993
Emberling, Geoff, et al., "Excavations at Tell Brak 1998: preliminary report.", Iraq, pp. 1–41, 1991
Fielden, Kate, "Tell Brak 1976: the pottery.", Iraq 39.2, pp. 245–255, 1977
Fielden, Kate, "A Late Uruk pottery group from Tell Brak, 1978", Iraq 43, pp. 157–166, 1981
Mallowan, M. E. L., "Excavations at Brak and Chagar Bazar", Iraq, vol. 9, pp. 1–259, 1947
[3] Roger Mathews, "Excavations at Tell Brak 4: Exploring an Upper Mesopotamian Regional Centre, 1994-1996", McDonald Institute Monographs, McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, July 15, 2003 ISBN  978-1902937168
Oates, David, "The Excavations at Tell Brak, 1976.", Iraq 39.2, pp. 233–244, 1977
Oates, David, "Excavations at Tell Brak, 1978–81.", Iraq 44.2, pp. 187–204, 1982
Oates, David, "Excavations at Tell Brak, 1983–84.", Iraq 47, pp. 159–173, 1985
Oates, David, "Excavations at tell brak 1985–86.", Iraq 49, pp. 175–191, 1987
Oates, David, and Joan Oates, "Excavations at Tell Brak 1990-91.", Iraq 53, pp. 127–145, 1991
[4] Oates, David, and Joan Oates, "Excavations at Tell Brak. v. 1: The Mitanni and Old Babylonian periods", McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, British School of Archaeology in Iraq, 1997
[5] Oates, David, and Joan Oates, "Excavations at Tell Brak. v. 2: Nagar in the third millennium BC", McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, British School of Archaeology in Iraq, 2001
Oates, Joan, "Excavations at Tell Brak, NE Syria, 1992.", Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3.1, pp. 137–140, 1993

External links

Piotr Michałowski, "Bibliographical information (Tell Brak & related matters)
SciAm: Ancient Squatters May Have Been the World's First Suburbanites Archived 2020-06-21 at the Wayback Machine
Death and the City: Recent Work at Tell Brak, Syra - Oriental Institute video/audio lecture Archived 2013-11-11 at the Wayback Machine
White-Levy Brak publication project
BISI Webinar: Prof Augusta McMahon on 'From Tell Brak to Lagash' - Augusta McMahon - Feb 21, 2022
Archaeology breakthrough after spy satellite images unveiled world's 'first city' - Express - Mar 8, 2022


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,848
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tell_Brak
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tell Brak est un site archéologique de la Syrie antique, situé dans la vallée du Djaghdjagh, un des principaux affluents du Khabour, sur la rive droite de la rivière. Aux périodes historiques, il correspond à la ville de Nagar, ou Nawar. Le site comprend plusieurs tells, le principal occupant une surface de 43 hectares, et s’élevant à plus de 40 mètres au-dessus de la plaine. L’ensemble du site s’étend sur 110 hectares, avec un périmètre de 600 mètres.
Il a d’abord été fouillé de 1937 à 1939 par l’anglais Max Mallowan. De nouvelles fouilles eurent lieu après 1976 sous la direction de David Oates jusqu’en 1993, puis de 1994 à 1996 sous celle de Roger Matthews.
La période d’occupation du site est très longue : éventuellement occupé dès la période de Samarra ou d’Hassuna (6500-6000), plus certainement à la suivante, celle d’Halaf (6000-5100), le site présente des niveaux des périodes suivantes jusqu’à la fin du IIe millénaire (période médio-assyrienne). Des minces traces semblent indiquer une occupation néo-assyrienne, et plus tard à l’époque romaine.

Préhistoire et Protohistoire
Des restes de céramique de la période de Samarra ont été retrouvés à Tell Brak. Mais c’est à partir de la période de Halaf que le matériel se fait plus abondant, semblant indiquer qu’on se trouve déjà en présence d’un village de taille notable. De la céramique d'Obeid (Ve millénaire) a été mise au jour pour ce qui concerne le millénaire suivant.
Pour le IVe millénaire (période de Gawra en Mésopotamie du nord, correspondant à la période d'Uruk), le site livre ses premiers monuments importants. Ce sont tout d’abord des résidences datant du milieu de la période. À la fin de la période d’Uruk (Djemdet Nasr), un temple important est construit au sud du tell, nommé le « Temple aux yeux », parce qu’on y a retrouvé plus de 200 figurines en albâtre plates, représentant des personnages ayant une ou deux têtes dont les yeux occupaient presque toute la surface (appelées « idoles aux yeux »). Cela constituait sans doute un dépôt d’offrandes, complété par de nombreuses amulettes zoomorphes ainsi qu’une grande quantité de perles en faïence ou cristal de roche. Le temple lui-même mesure 30 mètres sur 25, ses murs extérieurs sont décorés par des cônes formant une mosaïque et des rosettes de pierre, dans le style venu de basse Mésopotamie. Des feuilles de cuivre couvraient les murs intérieurs. Au fond du temple, on a retrouvé un autel décoré de pierres blanches et de lapis-lazuli.
Le site de Tell Brak a livré des sceaux et calculi pour cette période, attestant de l’existence d’une administration développée. On y a également exhumé deux tablettes portant des signes d’écriture pictographique, donc de style archaïque, qui sont les seules de ce type retrouvées hors d’Uruk. Ceci confirme donc l'importance de Tell Brak durant les débuts de l'urbanisation ; ce site apparaît comme le pendant nord-mésopotamien des premières villes du sud.

Périodes de Ninive V et des dynasties archaïques
Le début de la période des Dynasties archaïques correspond à la période dite de Ninive V, dont l'aire s’étend sur la Mésopotamie du nord, et caractérisée par une céramique monochrome à décor incisé. Sur le site de Tell Brak, on en trouve depuis la fin de Djemdet Nasr jusqu’à la période d’Akkad. Les dernières campagnes de fouille ont mis en avant l'importance de l'occupation au cours de cette période, et permis de mieux connaître celle-ci.
Le « Temple aux yeux » est encore en fonction au début du IIIe millénaire. Quelques dépôts d'objets, ainsi qu'une abondante glyptique, ont été exhumés dans les couches archéologiques de la période finale du dynastique archaïque. La ville de Nagar est attestée pour la première fois dans des documents écrits retrouvés à Ebla en Syrie, pour la première moitié du XXIVe siècle. Nagar est alors l’un des plus puissants royaumes de haute Mésopotamie avec Mari, et entretient des relations cordiales avec Ebla. Les souverains des deux royaumes s’échangent des lettres et des présents, et la princesse éblaïte Tagrish-Damu, fille d’Ish’ar-Damu, épouse le fils du roi de Nagar. On voit également un roi de Nagar aller rendre hommage au dieu Dagan dans son temple de Tuttul.
Si on ne dispose pas de textes provenant de Tell Brak pour cette période, on en a en revanche retrouvés dans un petit site voisin, Tell Beydar, qui correspond à l'ancienne ville de Nabada, capitale d'une province du royaume de Nagar.

Période d'Akkad
Comme ceux d’Ebla et de Mari, le royaume de Nagar est envahi dans la seconde moitié du XXIVe siècle par Sargon d'Akkad, qui l’incorpore dans son Empire. Après la destruction de la ville, une brève réoccupation a lieu sous le règne de Naram-Sin. Un palais est construit sur l’emplacement du Temple aux yeux. Il s’agit d’un bâtiment de 105 × 92 mètres, ouvert par une porte monumentale, organisé autour d’une grande cour et de quatre petites cours intérieures. D’autres bâtiments et résidences ont été exhumés dans le même secteur. Au sud-ouest du tell, un complexe cultuel important a été mis au jour. Le bâtiment mesure 23 × 8 mètres, et dispose de deux tours. Il est organisé autour d’une ante-cella menant à la cella. On y a retrouvé des dépôts rituels. Un autre temple plus petit, avec également un dépôt votif, a été dégagé au nord-est.

La fin du IIIe millénaire
Le site akkadien de Tell Brak est détruit après une occupation qui semble courte. Deux niveaux d’occupation sont attestés pour la fin du millénaire. La région connaît alors une forte expansion de l’élément hourrite, et Nagar tombe sous la domination de rois appartenant à ce peuple. On connaît le sceau d’un certain Talpush-atili, qui se dit roi de Nagar (non daté). Un royaume semble se constituer autour de Nagar (parfois appelée Nawar) et d’Urkish (Tell Mozan). On connaît par des sceaux retrouvés à Tell Mozan un roi Atal-shen, qui se dit endan (titre de souverain) d’Urkish et Nawar, sans doute vers la fin du XXIIe siècle. Un siècle plus tard environ, après une brève période de domination des rois de la Troisième dynastie d’Ur, qui mènent des campagnes dans la vallée du Khabur, on connaît le nom d’un autre souverain de la région, Tish-atal, endan d’Urkish.

Période amorrite
La période amorrite (ou paléo-babylonienne, 2004-1595) correspond du point de vue archéologique à l’expansion de la « céramique du Khabur » (céramique peinte de bandes ou motifs rouges) dans la région de Tell Brak. La population est alors de plus en plus hourrite. C’est le nord du tell qui est occupé à cette période, après l’abandon de la partie sud à la fin du millénaire précédent. On a retrouvé un petit sanctuaire ainsi qu’un four à céramique qui dateraient du XVIIe siècle environ.
La ville de Nagar apparaît dans les archives de Mari, documentant la première moitié du XVIIIe siècle. Une bataille y oppose notamment Yakhdun-Lim de Mari à Samsi-Addu d’Ekallatum, qui se disputent la domination de la vallée du Khabur, le premier réussissant à repousser le second. Mais quelques années plus tard Samsi-Addu finit par triompher de son adversaire et à faire passer la région sous son contrôle, situation qui dure jusqu’à la prise du pouvoir par Zimri-Lim de Mari, qui domine à son tour les royaumes du Triangle du Khabur. Nagar n’apparaît pas comme une puissance politique à cette période. Elle fait partie du royaume de Kahat (sans doute Tell Barri), vassal de Mari. Mais c’est un centre religieux de premier plan. Sa divinité tutélaire, la « Dame de Nagar » (Bēlet Nagar), est très importante, et sa statue effectue de nombreux voyages dans la région du Khabur, signe de la dévotion qu’elle y suscite. Son importance est encore attestée dans les archives de Tell Leilan pour la seconde moitié du XVIIIe siècle. Ce même corpus documentaire indique que la région du Khabur est passée sous la suzeraineté des rois du Yamkhad (Alep) après la chute de Mari en 1762 sous l’offensive de Hammurabi de Babylone.

Le royaume du Mittani
Vers la fin du XVIIe siècle ou au XVIe siècle se met en place un puissant royaume hourrite, le Mittani, dont le centre se trouve dans la région du Khabur. Tell Brak est l’un des sites les mieux connus pour cette région durant cette période, caractérisée par la « céramique de Nuzi » (peinte de motifs blancs sur fond sombre), issue de la « céramique du Khabur ».
Un édifice important date de la période du royaume du Mittani : un palais, d’un type original du point de vue architectural. Il dispose d’une cour centrale au sud, qui semble être une pièce de réception, puis au nord l’espace est organisé par une grande cour. On trouve des espaces de stockage, des cuisines (avec des fours), mais pas de zone résidentielle, qui devait se trouver à l’étage. À côté du palais, on avait construit un petit temple. Cette période a livré divers objets en faïence, en albâtre et en ivoire.
On a également retrouvé à Tell Brak deux tablettes juridiques rédigées en hourrite, datées des règnes de Artashumara et Tushratta.
La période de domination du Mittani prend fin avec la prise de la ville par les Assyriens au début du XIIIe siècle (sous les règnes d’Adad-nerari Ier ou Salmanazar Ier). Le palais semble connaître deux destructions successives. Un bâtiment est ensuite construit par les nouveaux occupants, pour une brève période, hors du haut du tell, sur lequel rien n’est bâti.

Phases tardives
Les périodes suivantes ont livré peu de documentation. De la céramique néo-assyrienne a été retrouvée sur le nord-est du tell.
Le site est réoccupé au début du Ier millénaire de notre ère par les Romains, qui construisent un fortin.

Références
Bibliographie
Introductions
Joan Oates, « Tell Brak, l'empire akkadien », Dossiers d'Archéologie, no 155 « Mille et une capitales de Haute-Mésopotamie »,‎ décembre 1990, p. 24-29
Joan Oates, « Tell Brak et l'empire du Mittani », Dossiers d'Archéologie, no 155 « Mille et une capitales de Haute-Mésopotamie »,‎ décembre 1990, p. 72-77
(en) Glenn M. Schwartz, « Brak, Tell », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 1, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 355-356
(de) Jesper Eidem, « Nagar », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. IX, Berlin, De Gruyter, 2001, p. 75-77

Études spécialisées
(en) M. Mallowan, « Excavations at Brak and Chagar Bazar », dans Iraq 9, 1947, p. 1-259  ;
(de) O. Loretz, Texte aus Chagar Bazar und Tell Brak, T. 1, Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1969 ;
(en) G. Wilhelm, « A Hurrian Letter from Tell Brak », dans Iraq 53, 1991, p. 159-168 ;
(en) D. Oates, J. Oates et H. Mc Donald, Excavations at Tell Brak,
Vol. 1, The Mitanni and Old Babylonian periods, Londres et Cambridge, 1997 ;
Vol. 2, Nagar in the third millennium BC, Londres et Cambridge, 2001 :
(en) R. Matthews (dir.), Excavations at Tell Brak. Vol. 4, Exploring an Upper Mesopotamian Regional Centre, 1994-1996, Londres et Cambridge, 2003.

Liens externes

(en) Articles sur Tell Brak (Archaeology Data Service (ADS))

 Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Mésopotamie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
TELL HALAF
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:31:40


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,180
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tell_Halaf
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tell Halaf (Arabic: تل حلف) is an archaeological site in Al-Hasakah in northeastern Syria, a few kilometers from the city of Ras al-Ayn near the Syria–Turkey border. The site, which dates to the sixth millennium BCE, was the first to be excavated from a Neolithic culture, later called the Halaf culture, characterized by glazed pottery painted with geometric and animal designs.
It is thought to have been historically named Guzana, i.e. the Biblical Gozan.

History
Neolithic (Halaf culture)
Tell Halaf is the type site of the Halaf culture, which developed from Neolithic III at this site without any strong break. The Tell Halaf site flourished from around 6100 to 5400 BCE, a period of time that is referred to as the Halaf period.

Chalcolithic
The Halaf culture was succeeded in northern Mesopotamia by the Ubaid culture (c. 5300-4300 BC). The site was then abandoned for a long period.

Late Bronze
Mitanni period
The Mitanni Empire controlled this region in the 15th century BC until around 1345 BC.

Hittite Period
In the Late Bronze, Suppiluliuma I of Hatti conquered the Mitanni stronghold of Carchemish, leading to the assassination of Tushratta of Mitanni around 1345 BC. With the fall of the Mitanni Empire, Carchemish became the seat of a hittite viceroy who ruled the region with the remnants of Mitanni as a bufferstate to the independent Assyrians in the east. Tell Halaf became a Hittite city led by the viceroy of Carchemish.

Iron Age (Neo-Hittite Guzana)
Ramesses III of Egypt states in an inscription dating to his 8th Year from his Medinet Habu mortuary temple that Carchemish was destroyed by the "Sea Peoples". This was a period of climate change and social unrest caused by drought, weakening the central powers, and marking the transition from the Late Bronze to the Iron Age. Furthermore, it saw the emergences of Neo-Hittite city-states.

Kingdom of Bit Bahiani (Guzana)
In the 10th century BCE, the rulers of the small Aramaean kingdom Bit Bahiani took their seat in Tell Halaf, re-founded as Guzana or Gozan. King Kapara built the so-called hilani, a palace in Neo-Hittite style with a rich decoration of statues and relief orthostats. These sculptures, even though it is not known how, were fundamental to the portrayal of Kapara along with their political power. By the end of the 9th century, it was a famous Syro-Hittite state.

Assyrian Period
In 894 BCE, the Assyrian king Adad-nirari II recorded the site in his archives as a tributary Aramaean city-state.
In 808 BCE, the city and its surrounding area was reduced to a province of the Assyrian Empire. The governor's seat was a palace in the eastern part of the citadel mound.
Guzana survived the collapse of the Assyrian Empire and remained inhabited until the Roman-Parthian Period.
In historical times, the mound itself became the citadel of the Aramaean and Assyrian city. The lower town extended 600 m N–S and 1000 m E–W. The citadel mound housed the palaces and other official buildings. Most prominent are the so-called Hilani or "Western Palace" with its rich decor, dating back to the time of King Kapara, and the "North-Eastern Palace", the seat of the Assyrian governors. In the lower town a temple (or cult room) in Assyrian style was discovered.

Excavations
The site is located near the city of Ra's al-'Ayn in the fertile valley of the Khabur River (Nahr al-Khabur), close to the modern border with Turkey. The name Tell Halaf is a local Aramaic placename, tell meaning "hill", and Tell Halaf meaning "made of former city"; what its original inhabitants called their settlement is not known.

Discovery
In 1899, when the area was part of the Ottoman Empire, Max von Oppenheim, a German diplomat travelled from Cairo through northern Mesopotamia on behalf of Deutsche Bank, working on establishing a route for the Bagdad Railway. On 19 November, he discovered Tell Halaf, following up on tales told to him by local villagers of stone idols buried beneath the sand. Within three days, several significant pieces of statuary were uncovered, including a so-called "Sitting Goddess". A test pit uncovered the entrance to the "Western Palace". Since he had no legal permit to excavate, Oppenheim had the statues he found reburied and moved on.

Excavations by Max von Oppenheim
According to archaeologist Ernst Herzfeld, he had urged Oppenheim in 1907 to excavate Tell Halaf and they made some initial plans towards this goal at that time. In August 1910, Herzfeld wrote a letter calling on Oppenheim to explore the site and had it circulated to several leading archaeologists like Theodor Nöldeke or Ignác Goldziher to sign. Armed with this letter, Max von Oppenheim was now able to ask for his dismissal from the diplomatic service (which he did on 24 October 1910) while being able to call on financing from his father for the excavation.
With a team of five archaeologists, Oppenheim planned a digging campaign that began on 5 August 1911. Substantial amounts of equipment were imported from the German Empire, including a small steam train. The costs totaled around 750,000 Marks and were covered by von Oppenheim's father's banking fortune. On arrival, the archaeologists discovered that since 1899, locals had uncovered some of the findings and heavily damaged them – in part out of superstition, in part to gain valuable building material. Oppenheim had recruited five hundred locals from Tell Halaf to help towards the excavation.
During the excavations, Oppenheim found the ruins of the town of Guzana (or Gozan). Significant finds included the large statues and reliefs of the so-called "Western Palace" built by King Kapara, as well as a cult room and tombs. Some of the statuary was found reused in buildings from the Hellenistic period. In addition, they discovered Neolithic pottery of a type which became known as Halaf culture after the site where it was first found. At the time, this was the oldest painted pottery ever found (together with those discovered at Samarra by Herzfeld).
In 1913, Oppenheim decided to return temporarily to the German Empire. The finds of Tell Halaf were left at the building he and his team had inhabited during the dig. Most of them were securely packaged and stored. The outbreak of World War I prevented Oppenheim from returning. However, Oppenheim was able to sell some of the stone reliefs, pottery and other artefacts he had excavated to various museums after the war including the British Museum and Walters Art Museum in Baltimore.
In 1926, Germany joined the League of Nations and it thus became possible for German nationals to conduct excavations in what was now the French-ruled Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon. Preparing for new excavations, in 1927, Oppenheim again travelled to Tell Halaf. Artillery fire exchanged between Ottoman and French troops in the final days of the war had severely damaged the building and the archaeological findings had to be dug out of the rubble. Once again, it was found that the locals had damaged some of the stone workings. Since he had made plaster casts during the original excavation, Oppenheim was able to repair most of the damage done to the statues and orthostat reliefs. His finds were divided with the French authorities; his share (approximately 80, or about two-thirds of the total) was transported to Berlin, while the other 35 were brought to Aleppo to form the core collection of today's National Museum of Aleppo. In 1929, he resumed excavations and the new findings were divided.

Tell Halaf Museum, Berlin
Attempts by Oppenheim to have his findings exhibited at the newly constructed Pergamon Museum in Berlin failed, as the museum refused to agree to Oppenheim's financial demands. He thus opened his own private "Tell Halaf Museum" in an industrial complex in Berlin-Charlottenburg in July 1930. The museum's concept of presenting the exhibits is considered quite modern even by today's standards.
In 1939, Oppenheim once more travelled to Syria for excavations, coming within sight of Tell Halaf. However, the French authorities refused to award him a permit to dig and he had to depart. Oppenheim also unsuccessfully tried to sell some of his finds in New York and again negotiated with the German government about the purchase of the Tell Halaf artefacts. In 1943, eight German-owned orthostat reliefs stored in New York were seized by the US Office of Alien Property Custodian. Amid these negotiations and activities, the Tell Halaf Museum in Berlin was hit by a British phosphorus bomb in November 1943. It burnt down completely, all wooden and limestone exhibits were destroyed. Those made from basalt were exposed to a thermal shock during attempts to fight the fire and severely damaged. Many statues and reliefs burst into dozens of pieces. Although the Vorderasiatisches Museum Berlin took care of the remains, months passed before all of the pieces had been recovered and they were further damaged by frost and summer heat.

Reconstruction of the artefacts
Stored in the cellars of the Pergamon Museum during the period of communist rule under the GDR, the remains were left untouched. After reunification, the Masterplan Museumsinsel of 1999 brought up the idea of having the Western Palace front from Tell Halaf restored. With financial support from Sal. Oppenheim and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft the Vorderasiatisches Museum engaged in its largest-scale restoration project since the reconstruction of the Ishtar Gate. From 2001 to 2010, more than 30 sculptures were reconstructed out of around 27,000 fragments. They were exhibited at the Pergamon Museum in Berlin in 2011 and at the Bundeskunsthalle Bonn in 2014. When the reconstruction of the Museumsinsel is completed around 2025, the Western Palace façade will be the entrance to the new Vorderasiatisches Museum.
The many fragmented sculptures now evidence the story of their ancient heritage but also that of their journey through the 20th century: Oppenheim's destroyed Tell Halaf Museum was in East Berlin and could not be visited by anyone, including Oppenheim's family members, until the reunification of Germany in 1990. The 2019 exhibition Rayyane Tabet / Alien Property by Rayyane Tabet at the Metropolitan Museum of Art displays the museum's orthostat reliefs and Tabet's graphite transfers, Orthostates, in tandem with his family heirlooms, and addresses the role of an encyclopedic museum in conversation and collaboration with the past, and its voices.

New excavations
In 2006, new Syro-German excavations were started under the direction of Lutz Martin (Vorderasiatisches Museum Berlin), Abd al-Masih Bagdo (Directorate of Antiquities Hassake), Jörg Becker (University of Halle) and Mirko Novák (University of Bern).

See also
Cities of the Ancient Near East
Beehive tomb
Hadad-yith'i

Notes
References
Abd el-Mesih Baghdo, Lutz Martin, Mirko Novák, Winfried Orthmann: Ausgrabungen auf dem Tell Halaf in Nordost-Syrien. Vorbericht über die erste und zweite Grabungskampagne (German), Harrasowitz, Wiesbaden 2009. ISBN 978-3-447-06068-4.
Abd el-Masih Baghdo, Lutz Martin, Mirko Novák, Winfried Orthmann: Ausgrabungen auf dem Tell Halaf in Nordost-Syrien. Vorbericht über die dritte bis fünfte Grabungskampagne 2008-2010. (German) Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 2012, ISBN 978-3-447-06828-4.
Jörg Becker: Tell Halaf. Die prähistorischen Schichten - Neue Einblicke. in: D. Bonatz, L. Martin (eds.): "100 Jahre archäologische Feldforschungen in Nordost-Syrien - eine Bilanz" (German). Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 2013, pp. 45–64, ISBN 978-3-447-10009-0.
Mirko Novák: Gozan and Guzana. Anatolians, Aramaeans and Assyrians in Tell Halaf. in: D. Bonatz, L. Martin (eds.): "100 Jahre archäologische Feldforschungen in Nordost-Syrien - eine Bilanz. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 2013, pp. 259-281, ISBN 978-3-447-10009-0.
Hijara, Ismail.  The Halaf Period in Northern Mesopotamia London: Nabu, 1997.
Axe, David.  "Back from the Brink."  Archaeology 59.4 (2006): 59–65.
Winfried Orthmann: Die aramäisch-assyrische Stadt Guzana. Ein Rückblick auf die Ausgrabungen Max von Oppenheims in Tell Halaf. Schriften der Max Freiherr von Oppenheim-Stiftung. H. 15. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 2005. ISBN 3-447-05106-X.
U. Dubiel – L. Martin, Stier aus Aleppo in Berlin. Bildwerke vom Tell Halaf (Syrien) werden restauriert (German), Antike Welt 3/2004, 40–43.
G. Teichmann und G. Völger (ed.), Faszination Orient. Max Freiherr von Oppenheim. Forscher, Sammler, Diplomat (German) (Cologne, Max Freiherr von Oppenheim-Stiftung 2003).
Nadja Cholidis, Lutz Martin: Kopf hoch! Mut hoch! und Humor hoch! Der Tell Halaf und sein Ausgräber Max Freiherr von Oppenheim. (German) Von Zabern, Mainz 2002. ISBN 3-8053-2853-2.
Bob Becking: The fall of Samaria: an historical and archeological study. 64–69. Leiden 1992.
Gabriele Elsen, Mirko Novak, Der Tall Halāf und das Tall Halāf-Museum (German), in: Das Altertum 40 (1994) 115–126.
Alain Gaulon, "Réalité et importance de la chasse dans les communautés halafiennes en Mésopotamie du Nord et au Levant Nord au VIe millénaire avant J.-C." (French), Antiguo Oriente 5 (2007): 137–166.
Mirko Novak, Die Religionspolitik der aramäischen Fürstentümer im 1. Jt. v. Chr. (German), in: M. Hutter, S. Hutter-Braunsar (ed.), Offizielle Religion, lokale Kulte und individuelle Religion, Alter Orient und Altes Testament 318. 319–346. Munster 2004.
Johannes Friedrich, G. Rudolf Meyer, Arthur Ungnad et al.: Die Inschriften vom Tell Halaf. (German), Beiheft 6 zu: Archiv für Orientforschung 1940. Reprint: Osnabrück 1967.

External links

Web site of current excavations
The Max von Oppenheim photo collection
Exhibition of Tell Halaf artefacts at Bundeskunsthalle, Bonn
Past exhibition of Tell Halaf artefacts in 2011 at the Pergamon Museum, Berlin Archived 2017-10-10 at the Wayback Machine
Article on reconstruction of Tell Halaf statues Archived 2011-06-08 at the Wayback Machine


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 798
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tell_Halaf
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tell Halaf (en arabe : تل حلف, tall ḥalaf), ou simplement Halaf, est un site archéologique du Néolithique et de l'Âge du fer qui se trouve en Syrie du Nord, dans le gouvernorat de Hassaké. Actif entre le VIe et le IVe millénaire av. J.-C. (périodes 5 à 8), il a donné son nom à la culture de Halaf. Il connait ensuite une autre importante phase d'occupation à compter du Xe siècle av. J.-C., période durant laquelle la ville, appelée Guzana, est la capitale d'un royaume araméen, Bit-Bahiani, puis, après sa conquête, d'une province assyrienne.

Historique
En 1911 et 1912, l'archéologue allemand Max von Oppenheim met au jour à Tell Halaf les principales structures d'une cité araméenne du Xe siècle av. J.-C., comprenant deux palais, dont l'un est orné de statues et de reliefs en basalte, ainsi que des fortifications et des chambres funéraires contenant des sculptures et des offrandes.

Culture de Halaf
Il s'est développé à Tell Halaf et dans le Nord de la Syrie une société paysanne maitrisant la poterie à partir de 6900 av. J.-C., s’étendant d’Alep à la future Assyrie. Cette culture n’est apparemment pas originaire de Mésopotamie, mais plus probablement d’Anatolie.
La culture de Halaf progresse rapidement : elle succède à la culture de Hassuna en Assyrie, se répand en Anatolie méridionale, atteint les monts Zagros, la Mésopotamie méridionale (céramique dite d’Hajji Mohammed), la vallée de l’Euphrate à Baghouz, la Syrie du Nord-Ouest où elle atteint la Méditerranée. Cette expansion pourrait être liée au commerce de l’obsidienne. Une mobilité plus grande semble néanmoins caractériser les populations du Proche-Orient au VIIe millénaire av. J.-C., peut-être en rapport avec un nomadisme lié à l’essor d’un élevage transhumant. Il est aussi envisageable que des centres de production de céramique aient cherché à la diffuser en utilisant ces nomades.
Le site d’Arpachiyah, dans le Sinjar, en Irak (périodes 6, 7 et 9), fournit plus de renseignements sur les aspects matériels et l’évolution de cette culture, en particulier l’emploi fréquent, mais non systématique, d’un édifice circulaire vouté déjà observé dans la culture de Hassuna.

Céramique
La culture de Halaf se distingue par la qualité de sa céramique : des vases de forme carénée et à large col sont recouverts de motifs figuratifs (êtres humains ou animaux, bucranes, reptiles, scorpions, panthères, oiseaux) ou géométriques, peints en noir ou rouge, une organisation en métope étant fréquente. Aux phases moyennes et récentes de Halaf, l’évolution se fera dans le sens d’une polychromie poussée (rouge, brun et blanc sur fond clair) et d’un gout plus prononcé pour les motifs floraux et géométriques.

Notes et références
Annexes
Bibliographie
Abd el-Mesih Baghdo, Lutz Martin, Mirko Novák, Winfried Orthmann, Ausgrabungen auf dem Tell Halaf in Nordost-Syrien. Vorbericht über die erste und zweite Grabungskampagne, Harrasowitz, Wiesbaden 2009,  (ISBN 978-3-447-06068-4)
Winfried Orthmann, Die aramäisch-assyrische Stadt Guzana. Ein Rückblick auf die Ausgrabungen Max von Oppenheims in Tell Halaf, Schriften der Max Freiherr von Oppenheim-Stiftung. H. 15. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 2005,  (ISBN 3-447-05106-X)
U. Dubiel – L. Martin, Stier aus Aleppo in Berlin. Bildwerke vom Tell Halaf (Syrien) werden restauriert, Antike Welt 3/2004, 40-43.
G. Teichmann und G. Völger (dir.), Faszination Orient. Max Freiherr von Oppenheim. Forscherm Sammler, Diplomat (Cologne, Max Freiherr von Oppenheim-Stiftung 2003).
Nadja Cholidis, Lutz Martin, Kopf hoch! Mut hoch! und Humor hoch! Der Tell Halaf und sein Ausgräber Max Freiherr von Oppenheim, Éditeur Philipp von Zabern, 2002,  (ISBN 3-8053-2853-2)
Bob Becking, The fall of Samaria : an historical and archeological study, 64-69, Leiden 1992
Gabriele Elsen, Mirko Novak, Der Tall Halāf und das Tall Halāf-Museum, in : Das Altertum 40 (1994) 115-126.
Mirko Novak, Die Religionspolitik der aramäischen Fürstentümer im 1. Jt. v. Chr., in : M. Hutter, S. Hutter-Braunsar (dir.), Offizielle Religion, lokale Kulte und individuelle Religion, Alter Orient und Altes Testament 318, 319–346, Munster 2004.
Johannes Friedrich, G. Rudolf Meyer, Arthur Ungnad et al., Die Inschriften vom Tell Halaf, Beiheft 6 zu: Archiv für Orientforschung 1940, reprint : Osnabrück 1967
Max von Oppenheim, Der Tell Halaf. Eine neue Kultur im ältesten Mesopotamien, F. A. Brockhaus, Leipzig 1931 (de Gruyter, Berlin 1966.), version française Tell Halaf. Une civilisation retrouvée en Mésopotamie, Payot, 1939.
A. Dornauer, Das Archiv des assyrischen Statthalters Mannu-kī-Aššūr von Gūzāna/Tall Ḥalaf, Harrasowitz, Wiesbaden, 2014

Liens externes
The History of the Ancient Near East Electronic Compendium
Halaf culture
(en) « Tell-halaf-projekt.de », sur tell-halaf-projekt.de (consulté le 20 mai 2024)
« Universität Tübingen - Presse- und Öffentlichkeitsarbeit », sur uni-tuebingen.de via Internet Archive (consulté le 20 mai 2024)
Photographies
Antiquité orientale mésopotamie site officiel du louvre, figurine féminine de Halaf
(en) Karen Radner, « Neo-Assyrian Archival Texts from Guzana », sur Neo-Assyrian Archival Texts from Guzana, The ATAE/Guzana Project, a sub-project of MOCCI, 2022 (consulté le 22 février 2022)
 Portail de la Préhistoire   Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de la Syrie   Portail du Kurdistan



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SALKHAD
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: historical_town
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:31:48


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 652
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salkhad
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Salkhad (Arabic: صَلْخَد, romanized: Ṣalḫad) is a Syrian city in the Suwayda Governorate, southern Syria.
It is the capital of Salkhad District, one of  the governorate's three districts. It had a population of 9,155 inhabitants in the 2004 census. In Salkhad, Druze make up the predominant population, while Christians and Sunni Muslim Bedouins represent a minority.
It is located at 1350 metres above sea level in the central Jabal el Druze highlands.

History
The city is mentioned four times in the Hebrew Bible as "Salcah" (Hebrew: סַלְכָּה, romanized: Salḵāh), a settlement in biblical Bashan. Beginning in the second century BC Salcah was a flourishing Nabataean city, where the gods Dushara and Allat were worshiped. A dedication to the goddess Allat, dated to year 17 of the reign of Malichus II, son of Aretas IV (AD 57), survives from the first century AD.
Afterwards it was incorporated into the Roman province of Arabia, it was one of the important cities in Hauran during Roman and later Byzantine epochs, Salkhad is indicated in the Madaba mosaic map of the sixth century AD.
Due to the strategic position of the city overlooking Hauran plains to the west, the Ayyubid dynasty built a fortress in Salkhad between 1214–1247 to counter a possible attack of the Crusades into inner Hauran. It has also been said that Al-Afdal was exiled here by his uncle and brother.
The importance of the city decreased after the Crusades, and it was occasionally overrun by Bedouins seeking pasture in the summer for their flocks.

Ottoman era
In 1596, Salkhad appeared in the Ottoman tax registers  as Salhad (Sarhad) and was part of the nahiya of Bani Malik as-Sadir in the Hauran Sanjak. It had a Muslim population consisting of 55 households and 25 bachelors, and a Christian population of 50 households and 20 bachelors. The residents paid a fixed tax-rate of 40% on wheat, barley, summer crops, goats and beehives; a total of 36,500  akçe.
In 1838 Eli Smith noted that the place in ruins.
A number of Greek Orthodox Christians, of Ghassanid ancestry, successively remained in the region. The town itself was abandoned in the late 18th century, but was repopulated by Druze and Greek Orthodox Christian families from Mount Lebanon beginning in 1858.
During Ottoman times, the city enjoyed a feudal-type autonomy like much of the Jabal el Druze area under the chieftaincy of Al-Hamdan family and later Al-Atrash family, many battles against the Ottoman Empire took place in this region by the Druze locals to maintain their autonomy.

Modern era
In the early 20th century, the city was part of the 1921–1936 Druze state under the French Mandate of Syria, the state was gradually incorporated into Syria after the Syrian Revolution of 1925–1927 led by Sultan Al-Atrash.
The city now is the centre of Salkhad district of Suwayda Governorate, it is the southernmost district in Syria.

Religious buildings
St. John the Baptist Greek Orthodox Church
Evangelical Baptist Church
Maqam Sultan Suleiman (Druze Shrine)

Climate
Salkhad has a cold semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification: BSk). In winter there is more rainfall than in summer. The average annual temperature in Salkhad is 14.8 °C (58.6 °F). About 291 mm (11.46 in) of precipitation falls annually.

Archaeology
The fortress of Salkhad is the most important monument located in a hill inside the city, built between 1214 and 1247 by the Ayyubid dynasty as a part of their defences against the crusades. It is said that this fortress were built in the site of older Roman fortifications. A hexagonal basalt minaret still standing intact in the city's main square. Many Roman old time houses, still partially inhabited by locals. Nabatean, Roman and Ayyubid tombs are also there with decorative motifs.

See also
Druze in Syria
Christians in Syria
List of castles in Syria
Capture of Salkhad

References
Bibliography
External links
Old image of the Fortress of Salkhad
Map of the town, Google Maps


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 72
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salkhad
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Salkhad, (arabe : صلخد, grec ancien : Σελχα), est une ville du sud de la Syrie, dans la province) de Soueïda.

Histoire
La ville est mentionnée sous le nom de Salcah dans la Bible, et faisait partie du royaume biblique de Bachân. Au IIe siècle av. J.-C., c'est une cité nabatéenne.

Notes et références
Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire  

 Portail de la Syrie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SAFITA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: town
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:31:58


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,562
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Safita
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Safita (Arabic: صَافِيتَا Ṣāfītā; Phoenician: 𐤎‬𐤐𐤕‬𐤄, Sōpūte) is a city in the Tartus Governorate, western Syria, located to the southeast of Tartus and to the northwest of Krak des Chevaliers. It is situated on the tops of three hills and the valleys between them, in the Syrian Coastal Mountain Range. According to the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), Safita had a population of 20,301 in the 2004 census. It has a religiously mixed population of mostly Greek Orthodox Christians and Alawites.
The Crusader-built fortress of Chastel Blanc in Safita enabled the city to historically dominate the surrounding region. Safita served as the center of a large rural district throughout Ottoman rule (1517–1918). Its influence receded with the administrative rise and economic development of the nearby port town of Tartus and the dimunition of its jurisdiction beginning under French Mandatory rule (1923–1946) and continuing post-Syrian independence. Safita shares close economic ties with Tartus, as well as having business networks extending across Syria's major cities and Lebanon. It remains an economic hub for the surrounding countryside.

History
Safita is located on a site where remains of the Phoenician settlement were discovered. The archaeological remains at the site of Tell Kazel were identified as the Phoenician city of Sumur mentioned in the Amarna letters.

Crusader era
Raymond IV, Count of Toulouse founded the County of Tripoli. The Knights Templar, to whom the lands of the region were given, built the fortress known today as the "Chastel Blanc". The fortress sits on a strategic observation point, and from there, it maintains eye contact with the network of fortresses of the Templar Order, Arwad and Tartus on the coast in the northwest, Chastel Rouge in the southwest and Krak des Chevaliers in the southeast. The Mamluk sultan Baybars captured Safita in 1271, bringing it under Muslim rule.

Ottoman era
Safita was the center of the principal nahiya (subdistrict) of the southern Syrian Coastal Mountain Range during Ottoman rule through the 16th and early 17th centuries, spanning about fifty villages and, at times, including the subdistricts of Mi'ar, Qulay'a and Tartus within its jurisdiction. The inhabitants of the nahiya were Christians and Alawites. The Sayfa dynasty, based in the hinterland of Tripoli, controlled the town until 1640, often using its fortress in their wars with the Druze Ma'n dynasty of Mount Lebanon. In 1621, the governor of Tripoli Eyalet, Yusuf Sayfa, dispatched a force against his nephew, and ally of the Ma'nid Fakhr ad-Din II, Sulayman Sayfa, in Safita for not forwarding the subdistrict's tax revenue.
After 1640, Safita is seldom mentioned in the historical chronicles of the middle Ottoman period. However, court records in Tripoli Sanjak, of which Safita was part, the earliest of which date to 1666 and 1667, indicate the iltizam (tax farms) of the Safita nahiya were sold to the Alawite brothers Muhammad ibn Shamsin and Zaydan ibn Shamsin, in 1667–1668. They were charged with collecting taxes on behalf of the government on fruit trees, agricultural lands, falcons, bees, silk, flour mills, buffalo, wave labor, festivals, weddings, and wintering camps of Turkmen and Arab nomads, as well as collecting the jizya (poll tax) from the Christian communities. The Shamsin (or Shibli) family emerged as the dominant local force of Safita at least from the late 17th century until the mid-19th century.

French Mandatory rule
Under Ottoman rule into the early 20th century, Safita served as the principal city of Syria's southern coastal mountain range by dint of its large population and its economic influence and administrative authority over a large district. Its decline began under French Mandatory rule (1923–1946), when the nearby coastal town of Tartus became a sanjak capital, diluting Safita's influence. In 1933, Safita had a population of 2,715 Christians and 280 Alawites. In 1943, Safita's population of 3,500 continued to largely consist of Greek Orthodox Christians. At the time, its houses were described as well-built and made of alternating black and white stones and clustered around the Crusader-era fortress.

Post-Syrian independence
Syria gained its independence in 1946. In 1960, Safita's population consisted of 4,300 Christians and 1,900 Alawites. With Tartus's elevation as the capital of a new governorate, the Tartus Governorate, in 1967, Safita's administrative subordination to Tartus was reinforced. The increased civic importance of Tartus and the construction of a major port there along with the development of irrigated commercial agriculture along the coastal plain drew more economic and civil activity away from Safita. Many Safitan entrepreneurs opened businesses in the developing port city, while maintaining their primary residences in Safita. In 1967–1970, Safita's administrative clout was further reduced when half of the Safita District was made a new district centered in the mountain town of Dreikish and the subdistrict of Safsafa was transferred to Tartus District.
As of the late 1990s, most Safitans worked in Tartus and the anthropologist Fabrice Balanche described Safita as a satellite or suburb of Tartus. At the same time, people from Safita have settled in all of Syria's major cities and in Lebanon, providing the city with a large economic network which mitigates its economic reliance on Tartus. Safita remains a commercial hub for a relatively large hinterland. Many residents from the surrounding villages open shops in the city, which also serves as a professional hub with a relatively large number of medical and legal practices and engineering businesses.

Christians in the city have a lower birthrate and a higher emigration rate, while there has been a continuous migration of Alawites from the countryside to the city. Balanche surmises, based on his own observations, that Safita's old town remains mostly populated by Christians, while the city in general has a slight Alawite majority. The two communities share similar lifestyles and their relations have not been characterized by sectarian tension. The city has benefited from Christians' established economic networks and many local Alawites' connections to Syria's military and political power centers. The most influential political movements in the city since the 1950s have been the ruling Ba'ath Party and the Communist Party. The state constructed a five-star luxury hotel in Safita from the Cham hotel chain and built a modern road network, widening the Safita–Tartus and Safita–Homs highways to three lanes, in the 1990s. The villages in the Safita District are also well connected to the city and in 1994, six adjacent communities were incorpated into the Safita municipality. This has allowed the city a significantly higher fiscal allocation from the state and these subsidies have funded major municipal projects, including preservation efforts of the old town, construction of a ring road, and new or improved sewer networks and wastewater treatment.

Geography
Safita is situated at the southeastern end of the Syrian Coastal Mountain Range. It is 26 kilometers (16 mi) southeast of the Mediterranean port city of Tartus and 55 kilometers (34 mi) northwest of Homs. The average elevation of Safita is 400 meters (1,300 ft) above sea level, while the Crusader fortress stands about 720 meters (2,360 ft). The hill upon on which Safita's citadel stands had historically enabled it to dominate the surrounding region. The citadel overlooks the fortress of Margat (Marqab) to the north, the Krak des Chevaliers (al-Husn or Hisn al-Akrad) to the east and Tripoli to the south, positioning it as a relay node between the three fortresses during the medieval period.
The city sits on a crossroads that intersects the east-west highway between Tartus and Homs and the north-south highway between Safita and Dreikish. Its north-south connectivity is enabled by its geography: compared with other towns in the coastal mountains, Safita's decline is not steep (not exceeding 400 meters (1,300 ft)) and the valleys to its north and south are not cut by streams. The Safita-Dreikish road is the only north-south connection in the mountains that is frequently served by public transport.
Due to its slope landform, the surrounding rural areas to Safita are used by landowners for olive cultivation and olive oil production.

Climate
Safita has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen Csa) with hot, dry summers and mild, wet winters. It is part of the wettest region of Syria due to the orographic effect of the coastal Mediterranean Sea mountains, receiving around 1,200 millimetres or 47 inches of rainfall per year, or about ten times as much as Damascus and four times as much as Aleppo.

Landmarks
The Crusader fortress "Chastel Blanc", a square tower built in 1202, is well preserved and rises to a height of 28 meters. It is 18 meters wide and 31 meters long. Among its walls, 3 meters high, is a chapel dedicated to St. Michael and serving the Greek Orthodox community of the city. The second floor of the building, which can be ascended in a stone staircase, was originally used as a dormitory and is illuminated by firing slits. Beneath the tower was a water cistern that was used by the inhabitants of the fortress.

References
Bibliography
Abu-Husayn, Abdul-Rahim (1985). Provincial Leaderships in Syria, 1575-1650. Beirut: American University of Beirut.
Balanche, Fabrice (2000). "Les Alaouites, l'espace et le pouvoir dans la région côtière syrienne : une intégration nationale ambiguë" (in French). Tours: Université François Rabelais. Retrieved 20 October 2024.
Betts, Robert Brenton (1978). Christians in the Arab East: A Political Study. John Knox Press. ISBN 9780804207966.
Winter, Stefan (2016). A History of the 'Alawis: From Medieval Aleppo to the Turkish Republic. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press. ISBN 9780691173894.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 266
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Safita
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

La ville de Safita (صافيتا en arabe) est située au nord-ouest de la Syrie actuelle, plus précisément au sud-est de Tartous et au nord-ouest du Krak des Chevaliers. Construite dans la chaîne des montagnes côtières de la Syrie, sur trois collines et dans les vallées intermédiaires, la ville compte 33 000 habitants. La ville est peuplée d'alaouites avec une forte minorité de chrétiens.
Elle est surtout connue pour la place importante qu'elle a occupée durant les Croisades, alors qu'elle était rattachée au comté de Tripoli. Bâtie par les Templiers sur des fortifications antérieures, la tour dite du Chastel Blanc surplombe l'agglomération et les environs.

Histoire ancienne
La ville est habitée depuis l'époque des Phéniciens et plusieurs découvertes archéologiques font état d'une présence phénicienne mais aussi cananéenne.

Les Croisades
En 1102, Raymond IV de Toulouse entreprend de conquérir les terres appartenant aux émirs de la dynastie des Banu Ammar de Tripoli. Après un siège de quatre ans, le Croisé prend l'entier contrôle de la ville de Tripoli et de plusieurs territoires des environs, dont Safita. Le sultan mamelouk Qalawun capturera à son tour le comté en 1289 et Safita repassera sous autorité musulmane.

Histoire récente
À partir des années 1950, la ville est un foyer du parti Baas et du parti communiste syrien. En 1994, six villages ont été intégrés à la municipalité.

Notes et références
(en) Cet article est partiellement ou en totalité issu de l’article de Wikipédia en anglais intitulé « Safita » (voir la liste des auteurs).

 Portail des Phéniciens et de la civilisation carthaginoise   Portail de l'ordre du Temple   Portail de la Syrie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
MASYAF
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: town
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:32:06


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,154
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masyaf
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Masyaf (Arabic: مصياف Miṣyāf) is a city in northwestern Syria. It is the center of the Masyaf District in the Hama Governorate. As of 2004, Masyaf had a religiously diverse population of approximately 22,000 Ismailis, Alawites and Christians. The city is well known for its large medieval castle, particularly its role as the headquarters of the Nizari Ismailis and their elite Assassins unit.

Etymology
Throughout the Islamic era and until the modern day, the Arabic name of the city was pronounced in a number of different ways by the inhabitants of the region as Maṣyaf, Maṣyat or Maṣyad. The Arabic name is a local pronunciation that evolved from the Assyrian name Manṣuate. The "nṣw" in Manṣuate correlates with the Arabic "nṣṣ", which means "to set up", according to orientalist scholar Edward Lipinsky. Moreover, Lipinsky suggests that the Assyrian name was likely a configuration of the Assyrian word manṣuwatu which correlates with the Arabic word minaṣṣatu(n), both of which translate as "raised platform". This translation is indicative of the promontory that the Masyaf fortress occupies which overlooks the rest of the city and the surrounding area.

History
Early history
Masyaf is the most probable site of the ancient Aramean city of Mansuate that existed in the 8th century BC. It later served as the administrative center of an Assyrian province by the same name in modern-day central Syria. Masyaf is also likely the site of Marsyas. Roman and Byzantine historians mentioned a city named "Marsyas" that governed the al-Ghab and Beqaa plains to the north and south of the site, respectively.
Masyaf and its fortress were first mentioned by Crusader chroniclers in 1099. However, because a fortification at Masyaf likely existed prior to the 11th century, it is probable that the Aleppo-based Hamdanid dynasty built a fort at Masyaf, due to its position as an outpost overlooking the mountain roads. At that time, the fortress was a part of Jund Qinnasrin (Chalcis Province) of the Fatimid Caliphate. In the autumn of 999, Basil II, the Byzantine emperor, destroyed the fortifications at Masyaf as part of his campaign to gain control of Antioch and its environs from the Muslims.
The area would later come under Seljuk rule, but in 1099, the Crusaders attempted to wrest control of Masyaf (and the more strategically important Rafania) following their capture of Tripoli. The Seljuk atabeg of Damascus, Toghtekin, launched a military campaign to prevent the loss of the area and reached a short-lived accommodation with the Crusaders whereby Masyaf and Hisn al-Akrad would remain in Muslim hands, but have to pay tribute to the Crusaders. Sometime later, Masyaf was controlled by the Mirdasid dynasty. In 1127, the Mirdasids sold it to the Shaizar-based Banu Munqidh family.

Nizari Ismaili era
In 1140, Masyaf was captured by the Nizari Ismailis, a sect of Ismaili branch of Shia. The fortress was being defended by a Banu Munqidh mamluk (slave warrior) named Sunqur, who the Ismaili force managed to ambush and kill. The Ismailis had chosen Syria as their new home and successively settled in the cities of Aleppo and Damascus and the fortress of Banias, each time being persecuted and massacred by the authorities or mobs of local residents incited by clerics who accused the Ismailis of being heretics or causing problems. Consequently, the surviving Ismaili leadership decided that establishing bases in Syria's cities and thus relying on the goodwill of various umara (princes) was untenable. Instead, they chose to settle in Jabal Ansariyah, a coastal mountain range dotted with fortresses, including Masyaf.

Following its capture, Masyaf served as the principal fortress for the Ismailis' chief da'i. Together with other fortresses acquired at around the same time, including al-Kahf, Khawabi, al-Qadmus and al-Rusafa, the Ismailis were able to carve an autonomous territory for themselves amid hostile Crusader states and local Muslim dynasties nominally affiliated with the Abbasid Caliphate. Masyaf served as the headquarters of the Ismaili da'i Rashid ad-Din Sinan and his elite unit of fida'i who were known as the Assassins.
In the mid-1170s, the Ayyubid sultan Saladin set about conquering Syria, ousting the Crusaders and uniting the Muslim world under Sunni Islam. The Ismailis considered Saladin a more dangerous threat than the Crusaders and allied with Saladin's rival in Aleppo to defeat the Ayyubids. Sinan's men launched two unsuccessful attempts to assassinate Saladin and in 1176, Saladin launched a punitive expedition against the Assassins in the strongly-defended fortress of Masyaf. Within a few days of the siege, Saladin withdrew due to an urgent need to redeploy against the Crusaders who were attacking Ayyubid territory in the Beqaa. He arranged a truce with Sinan mediated by the Ayyubid emir of Hama, Shihab al-Din Mahmud al-Harimi, Saladin's uncle.

Mamluk rule
A wall around the town of Masyaf was built in 1249 by the Persian leader of the Ismailis, Taj al-Din Abu'l Futuh. In 1260, the Mongols under Hulagu conquered most of northern Syria and briefly occupied Masyaf. However, following the Mongols' rout at the Battle of Ain Jalut at the hand of the Bahri Mamluks later that year, they withdrew from Masyaf and it once again fell under Ismaili control.
In 1262, Masyaf's rulers were ordered to pay tribute to the Mamluk sultan Baibars and some time after, the sultan had Masyaf's emir Najm al-Din Ismail replaced by Sarim al-Din Mubarak. Mubarak was later imprisoned in Cairo by Baibars and Najm ad-Din was briefly restored as emir before Masyaf was fully incorporated into the sultanate in 1270. Ismailis continued inhabiting it throughout Mamluk rule. Towards the end of the century, Masyaf became a major stopping point on the Mamluk postal route and was controlled by a commander who answered directly to the sultan due to its strategic role as a frontier fortress.
In 1320, the historian and Ayyubid emir of Hama, Abu'l Fida, noted that Masyaf was a "center of the Ismailian Doctrine" and that it was "beautiful" with gardens and a spring from which flowed a small stream. According to Ibn Battuta, who passed by the town in 1355, Masyaf was the center of a district belonging to the province of Tripoli and containing the fortress villages of al-Rusafa, al-Kahf, al-Qadmus, al-Ulayqa and al-Maniqa. Masyaf was later separated from Tripoli and transferred to the authority of Damascus province. In the mid-15th century, under Sultan Barsbay, a road was built that connected Masyaf with Tripoli, but the postal route no longer passed through the town. In 1446, the historian Khalil al-Zahiri described Masyaf as "a pleasant town, with an extensive countryside".

Ottoman era
Masyaf, along with the rest of Syria, was incorporated into the Ottoman Empire in 1516–17 following the Ottoman victory over the Mamluks at the Battle of Marj Dabiq. Masyaf became a part of the liwa (district) of Homs, and along with the other Ismaili fortresses in its vicinity (qala' al-da'wa), was responsible for paying a special tax. The town had a khan (caravanserai) which paid tolls to the Ottoman authorities. The tolls were abolished later in the mid-16th century. According to the Sufi traveler Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi, the emir of Masyaf in the early 1690s was a descendant of the Arab Tanukh tribe named Sulayman.
In 1703, the Raslan clan, an Alawite tribe, took over Masyaf and controlled it for about eight years until it was restored to the Ismailis following the intervention of the Ottoman authorities. During this period, the majority of Masyaf's Ismaili inhabitants followed the Nizari sect although there was a small Tayyibi minority too. In 1788, the emir of Masyaf, Mustafa ibn Idris, built a sabil (ablutions fountain) and a house that would be used by himself and successive Ismaili emirs.
In 1808, the Raslan clan led by Sheikh Mahmud Raslan attacked Masyaf, killing its Ismaili chief, Mustafa Milhim, and his son, and captured the fortress. About 300 of the town's Ismaili inhabitants were also killed, while many others, including the da'i (religious chief) of Masyaf, fled for Homs, Hama and other areas in central Syria, settling in those places temporarily. The Ismailis had already been in the process of being gradually expelled from Jabal Ansariyah by Alawite clans. The Ottoman governor of Damascus, Kunj Yusuf Pasha, intervened in the matter, dispatching a force of 4,000–5,000 soldiers to recapture the town. After three months of fighting, the Raslans surrendered Masyaf. Ismaili control over the town and its fortress was restored in 1810.
Two years after the resettlement of Masyaf by the Ismailis, Johann Ludwig Burckhardt recorded an estimated population of 280 families, most of which were Ismaili and 30 were Christian. Burchardt noted that the town's citadel, many houses, the mosque and most other buildings were either heavily damaged or destroyed from previous fighting. Throughout the remainder of the 19th century, Masyaf's population continued to decrease.

Modern era
The Allied Powers captured Syria from the Ottomans in 1917, after which the residents largely abandoned the fortress of Masyaf. British general T. E. Lawrence rested in Masyaf and remarked that the fortress was being used as a poorhouse at the time. During the French Mandate over Syria, the French separated the Jabal Ansariyah range from the rest of Syria to form the Alawite State. Masyaf was made a part of the State of Damascus, but in 1929, a number of rural Alawite villages in its immediate vicinity, including al-Rusafa, al-Bayyadiyah, Akakir, Maryamin and Abu Qubays, were ceded to the Alawite State. The latter merged with the rest of Syria in 1936. In 1939, Masyaf and its district was transferred from the Province of Hama to the Province of Latakia. Throughout the 1930s, rooms in the fortress were still being used by local residents.
In 1947, a year after Syria became independent from France, 3,808 Ismailis were recorded to be living in Masyaf. The Syrian government under President Amin al-Hafiz established Masyaf as a center for carpet weaving in 1965. The weaving workshops mostly employed women. In the 1960s, Masyaf's Ismaili community largely identified with the Nasserist movement, in contrast to the Alawites who dominated the surrounding villages who were mostly associated with the Baathists.
In 1970, much of the town of Masyaf still remained within the confines of the city walls. However, by 1998, its population and urban space had expanded considerably outside the walls. The fortress is situated in the northeastern part of Masyaf's old city. The walls remained in place, but the homes and gardens of local residents were built immediately alongside them. Within the walls is a mosque dating to the 12th century and according to local residents, is associated with Saladin. The fortress is considered a national monument and is directly under the authority of the Syrian Directorate of Antiquities.
In the Syrian Civil War after 2015, an alleged missile production facility in Masyaf and a base near the town, thought to be used by Iranian forces and militias, became repeatedly targets of airstrikes attributed to Israel.
On 8 September 2024, Israel launched a series of airstrikes as well as a ground raid by the Shaldag unit, targeting an underground precision missile factory reportedly built by Iran.

Geography
Masyaf is situated along the foothills of the eastern slopes of the Jabal Ansariyah coastal mountain range. The average elevation of Masyaf is 485 meters. It is just west of the al-Ghab Plain. The area is marked by gardens, orchards and fields of wheat and barley which are cultivated by local residents. To the north and south of Masyaf flow seasonal streams which feed into a tributary of the Orontes River, called al-Sarout.
The city of Hama is 45 kilometers to the east and Baniyas is 54 kilometers to the west. Hama is connected to the town via a road north of Masyaf which passes through al-Laqbah and Deir Shamil. Nearby villages include al-Rusafa to the southeast, al-Bayda to the south, al-Suwaydah to the southwest, Rabu to the west, Biqraqa to the northwest, Hurayf and Hayalin to the north, Zaynah to the northeast and al-Shiha to the east.

Climate
Masyaf has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification Csa). In winter there is much more rainfall in Masyaf than in summer. The average annual temperature in Masyaf is 17.6 °C (63.7 °F). About 1,049 mm (41.30 in) of precipitation falls annually.

Demographics
According to the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics, Masyaf had a population of 22,508 in the 2004 census. It is the administrative center of the Masyaf District and the Masyaf Subdistrict. The latter had a population of 68,184 in 2004. In the mid-1940s, its inhabitants were predominantly Ismailis. Today, it is a religiously mixed city of Ismailis and Alawites, with a Christian minority.

In popular culture
Masyaf is featured as the base of operations of the Assassin Order during the Third Crusade in the Assassin's Creed games series (mainly in Assassin's Creed and Assassin's Creed: Revelations). The village appears built on a rock, with the Masyaf fortress at the top.

Gallery
References
Bibliography
External links
 Media related to Masyaf at Wikimedia Commons


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 817
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masyaf
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Masyaf (en arabe: مصياف) est une ville de 32 262 habitants, en Syrie, dans la province de Hama, à mi-chemin entre Hama et le port de Baniyas. Elle est le chef-lieu du district de Masyaf. La ville et sa forteresse se trouvent sur le flanc est du massif côtier appelé Jabal Ansariya. Vers le Xe siècle, les Nusayrîs (appelés aussi Alaouites) infiltrent la région, qui reste actuellement leur fief.

Histoire
Le château de Masyaf a été construit pendant la période de domination byzantine. Sa situation en fait le point de contrôle de la route est-ouest entre Hama et Baniyas et la route nord-sud d’Antioche à Homs (Émese). La forteresse s'élève sur un éperon rocheux qui domine de 20 m la dépression fertile d’al-Ghâb irriguée par l’Oronte.
Raymond de Saint-Gilles, marchant sur Tripoli, la prend en 1103. Rachid ad-Din Sinan et les Nizârites venus d’Alamut se sont installés dans la région où ils ont acheté le château de Qadmus (La Cademois des croisés) puis celui d’Al-Kahf en 1134. À partir de là et jusqu’en 1140, la secte réalise un programme d'acquisition rapide de huit châteaux dont Masyaf. La ville devient ainsi la capitale d’une principauté que les croisés appellent les « Territoires des assassins ».
En 1157, un tremblement de terre frappe la région détruisant la forteresse de Chayzar.
En 1163, Rachid ad-Din Sinan prend la direction de la secte. Il fait de Masyaf sa résidence et reprend pour lui le titre de « vieux de la Montagne ».

Les relations entre Chrétiens, Nizârites et Sunnites se compliquent du fait d'alliances tactiques et de collusions, entremêlées de périodes de paix. En mai 1176, Saladin assiège Masyaf, mais renonce rapidement pour continuer ses campagnes dans le nord de la Syrie, après avoir conclu un accord dont on ne connaît pas le contenu.En 1192, Saladin parvient à convaincre le roi Richard Ier d'Angleterre dit Cœur de Lion de préserver le territoire des assassins. Bien plus, les Chrétiens, les Musulmans Sunnites ou Ismaéliens procèdent à des échanges commerciaux très lucratifs.
En 1193, Saladin meurt en mars et Rachid ad-Din Sinan, en septembre. Les Nizârites perdent ainsi un adversaire mais aussi leur chef le plus marquant.

En 1256, la forteresse d’Alamut se rend sans combat à l'armée mongole d'Houlagou Khan qui déferlait sur l'Iran. Elle est entièrement rasée. C'est la fin des Nizârites en Perse.
Masyaf est à son tour assiégée et prise par les Mongols en 1260. La même année le mamelouk Baybars prend le pouvoir en Égypte. À la fin de l’année, après la bataille d’Aïn Djalout à laquelle les Nizârites participent à ses côtés, Baybars reprend Masyaf aux Mongols. Les Nizârites récupèrent ainsi quatre forteresses perdues devant les Mongols. Finalement Baybars incorpore Masyaf à l’État mamelouk en 1270. La dernière place forte nizârite est la forteresse voisine d’Al-Kahf qui tombe aux mains de Baybars en 1273. Les Nizârites n’ont plus de place forte, l’influence des Alaouites ou Nusayrîs s’accroît dans la région.
En 1516, Masyaf passe sous l’autorité ottomane (en 1830-1841 d'Égypte). Au XIXe siècle, Nizârites et Alaouites continuent de se disputer la suprématie à Masyaf.
En 1920, pendant le mandat français, la domination des Alaouites est consacrée par la création du « territoire autonome des Alaouites ». En 1922, ce territoire devient l'État Alaouite, puis en 1930 "Territoire ou Gouvernement de Lattaquié".
En 2000, le programme d’aide aux villes historiques (Historic Cities Support Program) (HCSP) de l’Aga Khan a commencé une campagne de préservation de la ville et de la citadelle de Masyaf.

Le site
Le château lui-même a conservé une grande partie de son enceinte extérieure. Il occupe un éperon rocheux d'une dizaine de mètres de largeur. Il est entouré d'une courtine en assez petit appareil dans laquelle est englobé un donjon rectangulaire, qui domine l'ensemble. La construction offre des éléments hétérogènes réemployés, des colonnes gréco-romaines et byzantines notamment. Ces indices laissent supposer que le site était occupé antérieurement. La partie la mieux conservée est l'entrée surmontée de mâchicoulis et d'un chemin de ronde à meurtrières.

Culture populaire
En novembre 2007, la citadelle apparaît dans le jeu vidéo Assassin's Creed et dans une suite quatre ans plus tard, Assassin's Creed: Revelations, ce qui la rendra célèbre.

Notes et références
Notes
Références
Annexes
Articles connexes
Alamut
Ismaélisme
Nizârites/Assassins
Hassan ibn al-Sabbah
Nusayrites/Alaouites
Vieux de la Montagne
Assassin's Creed

Liens externes
(en) « Castle of Masyaf »(Archive.org • Wikiwix • Archive.is • Google • Que faire ?), sur iis.ac.uk, The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2008
(en) Anthony Campbell, « The Assassins of Alamut », 2004
(ar) « Masyaf »

Bibliographie
Janine Sourdel et Dominique Sourdel, Dictionnaire historique de l'islam, PUF, coll. « Quadrige », 2004, 1056 p. (ISBN 978-2-13-054536-1), p. 550, article Masyaf
Georges Pillement, Liban, Syrie et Chypre inconnus, Albin Michel, coll. « Les guides Pillement, », 1971

 Portail de l’histoire   Portail du Moyen Âge   Portail des croisades   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Syrie   Portail des châteaux



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
WADI AL-NASARA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Syria
Type: region
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:32:20


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 344
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wadi_al-Nasara
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wadi al-Nasara (Arabic: وادي النصارى / ALA-LC: Wādī an-Naṣārá "Valley of Christians") is an area in western Syria that administratively belongs to the governorate of Homs.
Most people in the area are Greek Orthodox Christians. It is ecclesiastically under the Archdiocese of Akkar, which has its seat in Cheikh Taba, Lebanon. The current Greek Orthodox Metropolitan of Akkar and Wadi al-Nasara and its dependencies (Safita and Tartus) is Basilius Mansour.

Landmarks
Wadi al-Nasara was a popular tourist site before the outbreak of the Syrian civil war. Among its touristic attractions are the Saint George's Monastery located in the town of al-Mishtaya, the Krak des Chevaliers Crusader castle located in the village of al-Husn and the shrine of the Lady of the Valley in al-Nasira.

Villages in the valley
Anaz (Arabic: عناز)
ِAltalleh/Al-Talla (Arabic: التلة)
Al-Hawash (Arabic: الحواش)
Mizyeneh (Arabic: المزينة)
Ain al-Ajouz (Arabic: عين العجوز)
al-Nasirah (Arabic: الناصرة)
Kafra (Arabic: كفرا)
Marmarita (Arabic: مرمريتا)
al-Mishtaya (Arabic: المشتاية)
Habnamrah (Arabic: حب نمرة)
Ain al-Barda (Arabic: عين الباردة)
Mashta Azar (Arabic: مشتى عازار)
Ain al-Ghara (Arabic: عين الغارة)
Qalatiyah  (Arabic: القلاط)
Zweitina (Arabic: الزويتينة)
Bahzinah (Arabic: بحزينا)
Ballat (Arabic: بلاط)
Kimah (Arabic: كيمة)
Tannurin (Arabic: تنورين)
Daghlah (Arabic: دغلة)
Jiwar al-Afas (Arabic: جوار العفص)
Muklous (Arabic: مقلس)
Kafr Ram (Arabic: كفرام)
Rabah, Syria (Arabic: رباح)
Amar al-Husn (Arabic: عمار الحصن)
Juwaniyat (Arabic: جوانيات)
Ain al-Raheb (Arabic: عين الراهب)
Ish al-Shuha (Arabic: عش الشوحة)
al-Muqaabarat (Arabic: مقعبرة)
al-Mazraah (Arabic: مزرعة)
Duwair al-Lin (Arabic: دوير اللين)
Al-Husn (Arabic: الحصن)

Notable people from Wadi al-Nasara
Victor Atiyeh- American politician, former Governor of Oregon (father was from Al-Husn)
Joseph Atiyeh- Olympic medalist, winner of Syria's first Olympic medal (born in Al-Husn)
Mitch Daniels- American politician, former Governor of Indiana (paternal grandfather was from Qalatiyah)
John X of Antioch- Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch (father is from Marmarita)
Yusuf Al-Khal- Lebanese-Syrian poet and journalist, pioneer of Arabic surrealist poetry (born in Al-Husn)
Zerefeh Bashur- first licensed female physician in the Levant (born in Safita)

See also
Antiochian Greek Christians
Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch
Eastern Orthodoxy in Syria


== References ==

