

====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
BAGHDAD
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:32:28


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 10,312
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baghdad
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Baghdad is the capital and largest city in Iraq. It is located on the banks of the Tigris in central Iraq. The city has an estimated population of 8 million. It ranks among the most populous and largest cities in the Middle East and the Arab world and constitutes 22% of the country's population. Baghdad is a primary financial and commercial center in the region.
Founded in 762 AD by Al-Mansur, Baghdad was the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate and became its most notable development project. The city evolved into an intellectual and cultural center. This, in addition to housing several key academic institutions, including the House of Wisdom, as well as a multi-ethnic and multi-religious environment, garnered it a worldwide reputation as the "Center of Learning". For much of the Abbasid era, during the Islamic Golden Age, Baghdad was one of the largest cities in the world and rivaled Chang'an, as the population peaked at more than one million. It was largely destroyed at the hands of the Mongol Empire in 1258, resulting in a decline that would linger through many centuries due to frequent plagues, shift in power and multiple successive empires. Later, Baghdad served as the administrative center of Ottoman Iraq, exercising authority over the provinces of Basra, Mosul, and Shahrizor.
During the First World War, Baghdad was made the capital of Mandatory Iraq. With the recognition of Iraq as an independent monarchy in 1932, it gradually regained some of its former prominence as a significant center of Arab culture. During the Ba'ath Party rule, the city experienced a period of relative prosperity and growth. However, it faced severe infrastructural damage due to the Iraq War, which began with the invasion of Iraq in 2003, resulting in a substantial loss of cultural heritage and historical artifacts. During the insurgency and renewed war from 2013 to 2017, it had one of the highest rates of terrorist attacks in the world. However, these attacks have gradually declined since the territorial defeat of the Islamic State militant group in Iraq in 2017, and are now rare. Since the end of the war, numerous reconstruction projects have been underway to induce stability.
Iraq's largest city, Baghdad is the seat of government. It generates 40% of the economy of Iraq. A major center of Islamic history, Baghdad is home to numerous historic mosques, as well as churches, mandis and synagogues, highlighting the city's historical diversity. Religious sites such as Masjid al-Kadhimayn, Buratha Mosque, the Shrine of Abdul-Qadir Gilani and Abu Hanifa Mosque are visited by millions of people annually. It was once home to a large Jewish community and was regularly visited by Sikh pilgrims from India. Baghdad is a regional cultural hub. The city is well known for its coffeehouses.

Name
The name Baghdad is pre-Islamic, and its origin is disputed. The site where the city of Baghdad developed has been populated for millennia. Archaeological evidence shows that the site of Baghdad was occupied by various peoples long before the Arab conquest of Mesopotamia in 637 CE, and several ancient empires had capitals located in the surrounding area.
Arab authors, realizing the pre-Islamic origins of Baghdad's name, generally looked for its roots in Middle Persian. They suggested various meanings, the most common of which was "bestowed by God". Modern scholars generally tend to favor this etymology, which views the word as a Persian compound of bagh () "god" and dād () "given". In Old Persian the first element can be traced to boghu and is related to Indo-Iranian bhag and Slavic bog "god." A similar term in Middle Persian is the name Mithradāt (Mehrdad in New Persian), known in English by its borrowed Hellenistic form Mithridates, meaning "Given by Mithra" (dāt is the more archaic form of dād, related to Sanskrit dāt, Latin dat and English donor), ultimately borrowed from Persian Mehrdad. There are a number of other locations whose names are compounds of the Middle Persian word bagh, including Baghlan and Bagram in Afghanistan, Baghshan in Iran itself, and Baghdati in Georgia, which likely share the same etymological Iranic origins.
Other authors have suggested older origins for the name, in particular the name Bagdadu or Hudadu that existed in Old Babylonian (spelled with a sign that can represent both bag and hu), and the Jewish Babylonian Aramaic name of a place called Baghdatha (בגדתא). Some scholars suggested Aramaic derivations.
Another highly recommended view is that Baghdad is a reference to Bagh and Dad as in Dadan, Dedan, and Dad as in Hadad, Adad. Another view suggested by Christophe Wall-Romana, is that name of "Baghdad" is derived from "Akkad", as the cuneiform logogram for Akkad (𒀀𒂵𒉈𒆠) is pronounced "a-ga-dèKI" ("Agade") and its resemblance to "Baghdad" is compelling. It is argued that, throughout all the various spellings of the city's name, whether Baghdad [بغداد], Baghdadh [بغداذ], Baghdan [بغدان], Maghdad [مغداد], Maghdadh [مغداذ], or Maghdan [مغدان], the only phonetically definite segment of the name appears to be Aghda [ىَغْدَا], which could be equated with the pronunciation of the name Agade.
When the Abbasid caliph al-Mansur founded a completely new city for his capital, he chose the name "City of peace" (Arabic: مدینة السلام, romanized: Madīnat as-Salām), which now refers to the Round City of Baghdad proper. By the 11th century, Baghdad became almost the exclusive name for the world-renowned metropolis.
Christophe Wall-Romana has suggested that al-Mansur's choice to found his "new city" at Baghdad because of its strategic location was the same criteria which influenced Sargon's choice to found the original city of Akkad in the exact same location.

History
Foundation
After the fall of the Umayyads, the victorious Abbasids sought a new capital. On 30 July 762, the Caliph Al-Mansur commissioned Baghdad's construction, guided by the Iranian Barmakids. He believed Baghdad was ideal for ruling the Islamic Empire. Historian al-Tabari recorded a prophecy from Christian monks about a leader named Miklas building a great city in the area, and Al-Mansur, who was once called Miklas, saw this as a good omen. He expressed deep affection for the site, declaring it would be the home of his dynasty.
The two designers who were hired by Al-Mansur to plan the city's design were Naubakht, a Zoroastrian who also determined that the date of the foundation of the city would be astrologically auspicious, and Mashallah, a Jew from Khorasan, Iran. They determined the city's auspicious founding date under the sign of Leo the lion, symbolizing strength and expansion.
Baghdad's strategic location along the Tigris and its abundant water supply contributed to its rapid growth. It was divided into three judicial districts: Round City (Madinat al-Mansur), al-Karkh (al-Sharqiyya), and Askar al-Mahdi. To prevent disturbances, Al-Mansur moved markets to al-Karkh. Over time, Baghdad became a hub for merchants and craftsmen. Officials called "Muhtasib" monitored trade to prevent fraud.
Baghdad surpassed Ctesiphon, the former Sassanid capital, located 30 km southeast. The ruins of Ctesiphon remain in Salman Pak, where Salman the Persian is believed to be buried. Ctesiphon itself had replaced Seleucia, which had earlier succeeded Babylon. According to the traveler Ibn Battuta, Baghdad was one of the largest cities, not including the damage it has received. The residents are mostly Hanbalis. Most residents were Hanbali Muslims. The city housed Abu Hanifa's grave, marked by a mosque and cell. Its ruler, Abu Said Bahadur Khan, was a Tatar who had embraced Islam.
Baghdad was designed to symbolize Paradise as described in the Qur'an. It took four years (764–768) to build, with over 100,000 workers involved. Al-Mansur recruited engineers and artisans worldwide. Astrologers Naubakht Ahvazi and Mashallah advised starting construction under Leo, associated with fire, productivity, and expansion. Bricks for the city were 18 inches square, and Abu Hanifah supervised their production. A canal supplied water for drinking and construction. Marble was used extensively, including steps leading to the river.
The city's layout consisted of two large semicircles, with a 2 km-wide circular core known as the "Round City." It had parks, gardens, villas, and promenades. Unlike European cities of the time, Baghdad had a sanitation system, fountains, and public baths, with thousands of hammams enhancing hygiene. The mosque and guard headquarters stood at the center, though some central space's function remains unknown. Baghdad's circular design reflected ancient Near Eastern urban planning, similar to the Sasanian city of Gur and older Mesopotamian cities like Mari. While Tell Chuera and Tell al-Rawda also provide examples of this type of urban planning existing in Bronze Age Syria. This style of urban planning contrasted with Ancient Greek and Roman urban planning, in which cities are designed as squares or rectangles with streets intersecting each other at right angles.
Baghdad was lively, with attractions like cabarets, chess halls, live plays, concerts, and acrobatics. Storytelling flourished, with professional storytellers (al-Qaskhun) captivating crowds, inspiring the tales of Arabian Nights. The city had four walls named after major destinations—Kufa, Basra, Khurasan, and Syria; their gates pointed in on these destinations. The gates were 2.4 km apart, with massive iron doors requiring several men to operate. The walls, up to 44 meters thick and 30 meters high, were reinforced with a second wall, towers, and a moat for added defense. On street corners, storytellers engaged crowds with tales such as those later told in Arabian Nights. The Golden Gate Palace, home of the caliph, stood at Baghdad's center with a grand 48-meter green dome. Only the caliph could approach its esplanade on horseback. Nearby were officer residences and a guardhouse. After Caliph Al-Amin's death in 813, the palace ceased to be the caliph's residence.

Center of learning (8th–9th centuries)
Within a generation of its founding, Baghdad became a hub of learning and commerce. The city flourished into an unrivaled intellectual center of science, medicine, philosophy, and education, especially with the Abbasid translation movement began under the second caliph Al-Mansur and thrived under the seventh caliph Al-Ma'mun. Baytul-Hikmah or the "House of Wisdom" was among the most well known academies, and had the largest selection of books in the world by the middle of the 9th century. Notable scholars based in Baghdad during this time include translator Hunayn ibn Ishaq, mathematician al-Khwarizmi, and philosopher Al-Kindi.

Although Arabic was used as the language of science, the scholarship involved not only Arabs, but also Persians, Syriacs, Nestorians, Jews, Arab Christians, and people from other ethnic and religious groups native to the region. These are considered among the fundamental elements that contributed to the flourishing of scholarship in the Medieval Islamic world. Baghdad was also a significant center of Islamic religious learning, with Al-Jahiz contributing to the formation of Mu'tazili theology, as well as Al-Tabari culminating in the scholarship on the Quranic exegesis. Baghdad is likely to have been the largest city in the world from shortly after its foundation until the 930s, when it tied with Córdoba. Several estimates suggest that the city contained over a million inhabitants at its peak. Many of the One Thousand and One Nights tales, widely known as the Arabian Nights, are set in Baghdad during this period. It would surpass even Constantinople in prosperity and size.
Among the notable features of Baghdad during this period were its exceptional libraries. Many of the Abbasid caliphs were patrons of learning and enjoyed collecting both ancient and contemporary literature. Although some of the princes of the previous Umayyad dynasty had begun to gather and translate Greek scientific literature, the Abbasids were the first to foster Greek learning on a large scale. Many of these libraries were private collections intended only for the use of the owners and their immediate friends, but the libraries of the caliphs and other officials soon took on a public or a semi-public character.

Four great libraries were established in Baghdad during this period. The earliest was that of the famous Al-Ma'mun, who was caliph from 813 to 833. Another was established by Sabur ibn Ardashir in 991 or 993 for the literary men and scholars who frequented his academy. This second library was plundered and burned by the Seljuks only seventy years after it was established. This was a good example of the sort of library built up out of the needs and interests of a literary society. The last two were examples of madrasa or theological college libraries. The Nezamiyeh was founded by the Persian Nizam al-Mulk, who was vizier of two early Seljuk sultans. It continued to operate even after the coming of the Mongols in 1258. The Mustansiriyya Madrasa, which owned an exceedingly rich library, was founded by Al-Mustansir, the second last Abbasid caliph, who died in 1242. This would prove to be the last great library built by the caliphs of Baghdad.

Stagnation and invasions (10th–16th centuries)
By the 10th century, the city's population was between 1.2 million and 2 million. Baghdad's early meteoric growth eventually slowed due to troubles within the Caliphate, including relocations of the capital to Samarra (during 808–819 and 836–892), the loss of the western and easternmost provinces, and periods of political domination by the Iranian Buwayhids (945–1055) and Seljuk Turks (1055–1135). The Seljuks were a clan of the Oghuz Turks from Central Asia that converted to the Sunni branch of Islam. In 1040, they destroyed the Ghaznavids, taking over their land and in 1055, Tughril Beg, the leader of the Seljuks, took over Baghdad. The Seljuks expelled the Buyid dynasty of Shiites that had ruled for some time and took over power and control of Baghdad. They ruled as Sultans in the name of the Abbasid caliphs (they saw themselves as being part of the Abbasid regime). Tughril Beg saw himself as the protector of the Abbasid Caliphs.

Baghdad was captured in 1394, 1534, 1623 and 1638. The city has been sieged in 812, 865, 946, 1157, 1258 and in 1393 and 1401, by Tamerlane. In 1058, Baghdad was captured by the Fatimids under the Turkish general Abu'l-Ḥārith Arslān al-Basasiri, an adherent of the Ismailis along with the 'Uqaylid Quraysh. Not long before the arrival of the Saljuqs in Baghdad, al-Basasiri petitioned to the Fatimid Imam-Caliph al-Mustansir to support him in conquering Baghdad on the Ismaili Imam's behalf. It has recently come to light that the famed Fatimid da'i, al-Mu'ayyad al-Shirazi, had a direct role in supporting al-Basasiri and helped the general to succeed in taking Mawṣil, Wāsit and Kufa. Soon after, by December 1058, a Shi'i adhān (call to prayer) was implemented in Baghdad and a khutbah (sermon) was delivered in the name of the Fatimid Imam-Caliph. Despite his Shi'i inclinations, Al-Basasiri received support from Sunnis and Shi'is alike, for whom opposition to the Saljuq power was a common factor.

On 10 February 1258, Baghdad was captured by the Mongols led by Hulegu, a grandson of Genghis Khan (Chingiz Khan), during the siege of Baghdad. Many quarters were ruined by fire, siege, or looting. The Mongols massacred most of the city's inhabitants, including the caliph Al-Musta'sim, and destroyed large sections of the city. The canals and dykes forming the city's irrigation system were also destroyed. During this time, in Baghdad, Christians and Shia were tolerated, while Sunnis were treated as enemies. The sack of Baghdad put an end to the Abbasid Caliphate. It has been argued that this marked an end to the Islamic Golden Age and served a blow from which Islamic civilization never fully recovered.
At this point, Baghdad was ruled by the Ilkhanate, a breakaway state of the Mongol Empire, ruling from Iran. In August 1393, Baghdad was occupied by the Central Asian Turkic conqueror Timur ("Tamerlane"), by marching there in only eight days from Shiraz. Sultan Ahmad Jalayir fled to Syria, where the Mamluk Sultan Barquq protected him and killed Timur's envoys. Timur left the Sarbadar prince Khwaja Mas'ud to govern Baghdad, but he was driven out when Ahmad Jalayir returned.

In 1401, Baghdad was again sacked, by Timur, a Central Asian Turko-Mongol figure. When his forces took Baghdad, he spared almost no one, and ordered that each of his soldiers bring back two severed human heads. Baghdad became a provincial capital controlled by the Mongol Jalayirid (1400–1411), Turkic Kara Koyunlu (1411–1469), Turkic Ak Koyunlu (1469–1508), and the Iranian Safavid (1508–1534) dynasties.

Ottoman and Mamluks (16th–19th centuries)
The Safavids took control of the city in 1509 under the leadership of Shah Ismail I. It remained under Safavid rule until the Ottomans seized it in 1535, but the Safavids regained control in 1624. A massacre occurred when the Shah's army entered the city. It remained under Safavid rule until 1639 when Sultan Murad IV recaptured it in 1638.
In 1534, Baghdad was captured by the Ottoman Empire, becoming the administrative capital of Ottoman Iraq. Under the Ottomans, Baghdad continued into a period of decline, partially as a result of the enmity between its rulers and Iranian Safavids, which did not accept the Sunni control of the city. Between 1623 and 1638, it returned to Iranian rule before falling back into Ottoman hands. Baghdad has suffered severely from visitations of the plague and cholera, and sometimes two-thirds of its population has been wiped out. The city became part of an eyalet and then a vilayet.
For a time, Baghdad had been the largest city in the Middle East. The city saw relative revival in the latter part of the 18th century, under Mamluk government. Direct Ottoman rule was reimposed by Ali Rıza Pasha in 1831. From 1851 to 1852 and from 1861 to 1867, Baghdad was governed, under the Ottoman Empire by Mehmed Namık Pasha. The Nuttall Encyclopedia reports the 1907 population of Baghdad as 185,000.
The city's municipality was established in 1868, and Ibrahim al-Daftari was appointed its first mayor. The year 1869 is of great importance in the history of Baghdad in the Ottoman era, as it was the beginning of what can be considered a distinct era of the Ottoman eras, the foundations of which were laid by Governor Midhat Pasha, who implemented a number of reform systems and laws that the state legislated during the era of reforms and reconstruction, which was called the Tanzimat era. The overall importance of Baghdad to the Ottomans was that they made the headquarters of the Sixth Corps of the Ottoman Army in the city.
By the 19th century, Baghdad emerged as a leading center for Jewish learning. The city had Jewish population of over 6,000 and had numerous yeshivas. The Jewish population has grown so rapidly that by 1884, there were 30,000 Jews in Baghdad and by 1900, around 50,000, comprising over a quarter of the city's total population. Large-scale Jewish immigration from Kurdistan to Baghdad continued throughout this period. By the mid-19th century, the religious infrastructure of Baghdad grew to include a large yeshiva which trained up to sixty rabbis at time. Religious scholarship flourished in Baghdad, which produced great rabbis, such as Joseph Hayyim ben Eliahu Mazal-Tov, known as the Ben Ish Chai (1834–1909) or Rabbi Abdallah Somekh (1813–1889). During this time, Baghdadi Jews established a successful trade diaspora in China, India and Singapore.

Modern era
Baghdad and southern Iraq remained under Ottoman rule until 1918, when they were captured by the British during World War I. In 1920, a revolt erupted in Baghdad against new British policies. It began in summer with mass demonstrations by Iraqis, including protests by embittered officers from the old Ottoman Army. The revolt gained momentum and spread to the middle and lower Euphrates. The British authorities retaliated by air bombing across Baghdad, which killed thousands of residents. In 1921, under the Mandate of Mesopotamia, Baghdad became the capital of the British-protected monarchy. Baghdad was made capital of the independent kingdom of Iraq in 1932.
Several architectural and planning projects were commissioned to reinforce this administration. During this period, the substantial Jewish community (probably exceeding 100,000 people) comprised between a quarter and a third of the city's population. The National Museum of Iraq and the University of Baghdad were built by King Faisal, who laid foundation for the modern Iraqi state. The city's population grew from an estimated 145,000 in 1900 to 580,000 in 1950. A development plan came in 1957, visioned by Frank Lloyd Wright. The plan proposed to build a cultural hub on an island on the river, with an opera house, museums, a university, shopping malls, and a 300-foot statue of the fifth Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid.
On 1 April 1941, members of the "Golden Square" led by former minister Rashid Ali al-Gaylani staged a coup in Baghdad and installed a pro-German and pro-Italian government to replace the pro-British government of Regent Abd al-Ilah. The British forces intervened in the resulting Anglo-Iraqi War. Fearing the advancement, Gaylani and his government had fled, and the mayor of Baghdad surrendered to the British and Commonwealth forces. On 1–2 June, during the ensuing power vacuum, Jewish residents were attacked following rumors they had aided the British. In what became known as the Farhud, over 180 Jews were killed and 1,000 injured, 900 Jewish homes were destroyed, and hundreds of Jewish properties were ransacked. Many Jewish girls were raped and children maimed in front of their families. Between 300 and 400 non-Jewish rioters were killed in the attempt to quell the violence. Between 1950 and 1951, Jews were targeted in series of bombings. According to Avi Shlaim, Israel was behind bombings.

On 14 July 1958, a significant portion of the Iraqi Army under Abdul-Karim Qasim, staged a coup to topple the Kingdom of Iraq. The army seized control over Baghdad and stormed the radio station and the Al-Rehab Palace. Many people were brutally killed during the coup, including King Faisal II, former Regent Abd al-Ilah and former Prime Minister Nuri al-Said and members of the royal family. Many of the royal figures' bodies were dragged through the streets and mutilated. Mob violence emerged and several foreign nationals staying at the Baghdad Hotel, including Americans and Jordanians were killed. New principles were adopted for the city's development. New Baghdad and Sadr City were developed during the reign of Qasim. In 1960, Baghdad hosted an international conference with dignitaries from Iran, Venezuela and Saudi Arabia, that founded Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).During the 1970s, Baghdad experienced a period of prosperity and growth because of a sharp increase in the price of petroleum, Iraq's main export. New infrastructure including oil pipelines, modern sewerage, and highways were built. Master plans of the city (1967 and 1973) were delivered by the Polish planning office Miastoprojekt-Kraków, mediated by Polservice. Saddam Hussein sponsored architectural and artwork events, that attracted world's popular architects. The city had a vibrant lifestyle. Baghdad was called as "Nuremberg of 1930s" and "Las Vegas of the 1980s".
However, the Iran–Iraq War of the 1980s was a difficult time for the city, as money was diverted to the military and thousands of residents endured devastations. Iran launched a number of missiles and rockets on Baghdad, some of them hitting dangerously close to Al-Rashid Street and the Jewish Quarter. Power plants and oil refineries were damaged. A nuclear reactor near Baghdad was destroyed in an airstrike by Israel. Despite the war, preparations were underway for Baghdad to host a Non-Alignment Movement summit. Conference centers and hotels such as Palestine Hotel, Al-Mansour Hotel and Ishtar Hotel were built. However, the summit was later shifted to New Delhi, due to deteriorating security.
During the Gulf War, Baghdad was the most heavily defended area of Iraq. Initially, U.S. airstrikes on Baghdad failed and resulted a tactical victory for the Iraqi Air Force. Later, the Coalition forces proceeded with aerial bombings. Air defense, communication systems, bridges, chemical weapon facilities, and artilleries were damaged. Oil refineries and airport were targeted. On 13 February 1991, an aerial bombing attack in Amiriya killed at least 408 civilians. Shortly after the end of the war, ethnic Kurds and Shi'a Muslims led uprisings against the government. Clashes took place Shi'a rebels and the Republican Guard led by Qusay Hussein. Sadr City was besieged until the order restored. Another uprising occurred in 1999, after Ayatollah Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr was assassinated in Najaf. Unrest began as large scale protests took place in Shia neighborhoods of Baghdad, specially Saddam City. The Republican Guard deployed in the district suppressed the demonstration, leaving between 27 and 100 dead.
Baghdad was targeted in frequent U.S. airstrikes. On 26 June 1993, cruise missiles were launched into downtown Baghdad, targeting the intelligence headquarters in the Mansour district. The attack killed nine civilians nearby, including actress and painter Layla Al-Attar. During the 1998 bombing of Iraq, missiles struck multiple locations across Baghdad, including presidential palaces, several Republican Guard barrakcs, and offices of the Ministry of Defense and the Military industry. On February 16, 2001, the U.S. launched air strikes on five military targets at Taji.

21st century (2001–present)
The city was economically drained, as a result of the Gulf War and the subsequent embargo against Iraq. By the end of the 1990s, the government made improvements and began rebuilding Baghdad. Government offices, presidential palaces, bridges and roads damaged in the war and follow-up U.S. attacks were restored. The city's airport was reopened, with flights from Lebanon, Syria and Jordan. Numerous mosques were built as a part of the Faith Campaign. In 2001, a broad initiative came to restore Baghdad's cultural heritage. Older mosques, churches, mandis and synagogues were restored and other historical structures were rebuilt. Under Saddam's architectural vision, a large number of palaces were built around the city. However, these efforts were interrupted by the war which began in 2003.
In 2003, the United States-led coalition invaded Iraq. Coalition forces launched massive aerial assaults. The resistance of the Iraqi Army of the city's airport delayed coalition's entry into Baghdad. Following the fall of Baghdad on 9 April 2003, the government lost its power. A statue of Saddam was toppled in Firdous Square, symbolizing the end of his rule. Many of the former government officials were either killed or captured, while others managed to escape and flee. After the overthrow the government, the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) was formed. CPA's decisions caused a power vacuum. Also two minor riots took place in 2003, on 21 July and 2 October, causing some disturbance in the population. Shortly after the invasion and the fall of the regime, an insurgancy began against the U.S-led rule of Iraq, consisting of former government officers and Islamist groups.
Bombings took place at Jordanian Embassy and Canal Hotel. Religious and ethnic minorities,— Christians, Mandaeans, and Jews, began leaving the city out of fear of being targeted in attacks, as they were subjected to kidnappings, death threats, and violence. The Iraqi Film Archives site was bombed, priceless collection of artifacts in the National Museum was looted, and thousands of ancient manuscripts in the National Library were destroyed. The Haifa Street helicopter incident on 12 September was controversial. On the eve of Ashura on 2 March 2004, one of the deadliest bombing took place in Baghdad, that killed at least 80–100 and injured 200 Shi'a Muslims. In 2005, over 965 people were killed in Al-Aimmah Bridge near Al-Kadhimiya Mosque. Attempts were made to rescue people, specially from the Sunni district of Adhamiyah, which is today seen as a symbol of unity.
Coinciding the execution of Saddam Hussein in 2006, violence increased during the civil war between Shi'ite militias and Sunni insurgents. Shi'ite militias were Muqtada as-Sadr's Jaysh al-Mahdi (JAM) and the Iranian-backed Special Groups and among Sunni insurgents, the largest was Al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI). Sunni insurgents established their bases Mansour, Adhamiyah and Doura. Mansour district borders the Shi'ite populated Kadhimiyah and East Rasheed. Before 2003, it was home to wealthy Sunnis and Ba'athist officials. Hence, when the regime fell, it quickly became a stronghold for the Sunni insurgency. While Shia militias were based in Sadr City, Kadhimiyah, and West Rasheed, with Bab Al-Sharqi becoming stronghold for the Mahdi Army. Later, they also expanded into the surrounding districts of eastern Baghdad. 9 Nissan, Karadah, and Rusafa were dominated by Shias.
Under Operation Imposing Law (Operation Fardh al-Qanoon), the coalition forces and post-2003 Iraqi Army successfully defeated Al-Qaeda and targeted Shia militias. By 2009, the level of violence decreased. However, violence continued. The period surrounding Provincial Elections was remarkably peaceful. But Baghdad witnessed an uptick in attacks in early April 2009, when a series of suicide bomb and vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attacks were perpetrated across the capital.  The war and subsequent occupation ended in 2011, that caused huge damage to Baghdad's transportation, power, and sanitary infrastructure. It resulted in massive civilian casualties, whose number is disputed.
Though the war ended, but an Islamist insurgency lasted until 2013. Baghdad experienced anti-government protests by Sunnis during the Arab Spring. It was followed by another war from 2013 to 2017 and a low-level insurgency from 2017, which included suicide bombings in January 2018 and January 2021. It has been site of clashes between the citizens and the government. The city attracted global media attention on 3 January 2020, when Iranian general Qasem Soleimani was assassinated in a U.S. drone strike near Baghdad Airport.  In December 2015, Baghdad was selected by UNESCO as the first Arab city of the center of literary creativity.

Geography
The city is located on a vast plain bisected by the Tigris river. The Tigris splits Baghdad in half, with the eastern half being called "Risafa" and the Western half known as "Karkh". The land on which the city is built is almost entirely flat and low-lying, being of quaternary alluvial origin due to periodic large flooding of the Tigris river. The Diyala river is a tributary of the Tigris, flowing southeast of the city and bordering its eastern suburbs.
Baghdad is 529.8 kilometres (329.2 mi) northwest of Basra, 402.9 kilometres (250.4 mi) south of Mosul, 366.8 kilometres (227.9 mi) south of Erbil and 103.8 kilometres (64.5 mi) northeast of Karbala. Located to the south is Mahmoudiyah, which serves as the gateway to Baghdad.

Climate
Baghdad has a hot desert climate (Köppen BWh), featuring extremely hot, prolonged, dry summers and mild to cool, slightly wet, short winters. In the summer, from June through August, the average maximum temperature is as high as 44 °C (111 °F) and accompanied by sunshine. Rainfall has been recorded on fewer than half a dozen occasions at this time of year and has never exceeded 1 mm (0.04 in). Even at night, temperatures in summer are seldom below 24 °C (75 °F). Baghdad's record highest temperature of 51.8 °C (125.2 °F) was reached on 28 July 2020. Humidity is under 50% in summer, due to Baghdad's distance from both the marshes in southern Iraq and the coasts of the Persian Gulf. Dust storms from the deserts to the west are a normal occurrence during the summer.
Its winter temperatures are those of a hot desert climate. From December through February, Baghdad has maximum temperatures averaging 16 to 19 °C (61 to 66 °F), with highs possible above 21 °C (70 °F). Lows below freezing occur statistically a couple of times per year.
Annual rainfall, almost entirely confined to the period from November through March, averages approximately 150 mm (5.91 in), but has been as high as 338 mm (13.31 in) and as low as 37 mm (1.46 in). On 11 January 2008, light snow fell across Baghdad for the first time in 100 years. Snowfall was again reported on 11 February 2020, with accumulations across the city.

Governance
Administratively, Baghdad Governorate is divided into districts which are further divided into sub-districts. Municipally, the governorate is divided into 9 municipalities, which have responsibility for local issues. Regional services, however, are coordinated and carried out by a mayor who oversees the municipalities. The governorate council is responsible for the governorate-wide policy. These official subdivisions of the city served as administrative centers for the delivery of municipal services but until 2003 had no political function. Beginning in April 2003, the U.S—controlled Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) began the process of creating new functions for these. The process initially focused on the election of neighborhood councils in official neighborhoods, elected by neighborhood caucuses. The CPA convened a series of meetings in each neighborhood to explain local government, to describe the caucus election process and to encourage participants to spread the word and bring friends, relatives and neighbors to subsequent meetings.
Each neighborhood process ultimately ended with a final meeting where candidates for the new neighborhood councils identified themselves and asked their neighbors to vote for them. Once all 88 neighborhood councils were in place, each neighborhood council elected representatives from among their members to serve on one of the city's nine district councils. The number of neighborhood representatives on a district council is based upon the neighborhood's population. The next step was to have each of the nine district councils elect representatives from their membership to serve on the 37 member Baghdad City Council. Later, the number of official neighborhoods were increased to 89. This three tier system of local government connected the people of Baghdad to the central government through their representatives from the neighborhood, through the district, and up to the city council. The same process was used to provide representative councils for the other communities in Baghdad Province outside of the city itself. There, local councils were elected from 20 neighborhoods (Nahia) and these councils elected representatives from their members to serve on six district councils (Qada).
As within the city, the district councils then elected representatives from among their members to serve on the 35 member Baghdad Regional Council. The first step in the establishment of the system of local government for Baghdad Province was the election of the Baghdad Provincial Council. As before, the representatives to the Provincial Council were elected by their peers from the lower councils in numbers proportional to the population of the districts they represent. The 41 member Provincial Council took office in February 2004 and served until national elections held in January 2005, when a new Provincial Council was elected. This system of 127 separate councils may seem overly cumbersome; however, Baghdad Province is home to approximately seven million people. At the lowest level, the neighborhood councils, each council represents an average of 75,000 people. The nine District Advisory Councils (DAC) are as follows:

The nine districts are subdivided into 89 smaller neighborhoods which may make up sectors of any of the districts above. The following is a selection (rather than a complete list) of these neighborhoods:

Notable streets
Haifa Street
Hilla Road – Runs from the north into Baghdad via Yarmouk (Baghdad)
Caliphs Street – site of historical mosques and churches
Al-Sa'doun Street – stretching from Liberation Square to Masbah
Abu Nuwas Street – runs along the Tigris from the Jumhouriya Bridge to 14 July Suspended Bridge
Damascus Street – goes from Damascus Square to the Baghdad Airport Road
Mutanabbi Street – A street with numerous bookshops, named after the 10th century Iraqi poet Al-Mutanabbi
Rabia Street
14 July Street (Mosul Road)
Muthana al-Shaibani Street
Bor Saeed (Port Said) Street
Thawra Street
Al-Qanat Street – runs through Baghdad north-south
Al-Khat al-Sare'a – Mohammed al-Qasim (high speed lane) – runs through Baghdad, north–south
Industry Street runs by the University of Technology – center of the computer trade in Baghdad
Al Nidhal Street
Al-Rasheed Street – city center Baghdad
Al-Jumhuriya Street – city center Baghdad
Falastin Street
Tariq al-Muaskar – (Al-Rasheed Camp Road)
Akhrot street
Baghdad Airport Road

Demographics
Baghdad's population was estimated at 7.22 million in 2015. The surrounding metropolitan region's population is estimated to be 10,500,000. It is second largest city in the Arab world after Cairo and fourth largest metropolitan area in the Middle East after Tehran. At the beginning of the 21st century, some 1.5 million people migrated to Baghdad. The 2013–2017 civil war following the Islamic State's invasion in 2014 caused hundreds of thousands of Iraqi internally displaced people to flee to the city.

Ethnicity
The vast majority of Baghdad's ethnic population are Iraqi Arabs, while minority groups include Kurds, Feyli, Kurdish, Turkmen, Assyrians, Kawliya, Circassians, Mandaeans, and Armenians. Post-2003 have left an impact of Baghdad's ethnic composition. In 2003, approximately 500,000 Kurds lived in Baghdad. As of 2016, around 300,000 remained in Baghdad. Among them, about 150,000 are Shi'a mostly of Luri origin. The main Kurdish neighborhood is situated in central Baghdad, known as the Quarter of Kurds (Akd al–Akrad). It is itself home to more than 200 Kurdish families that have lived for generations.
Christians in Baghdad are predominantly ethnic Assyrians and Armenians. Assyrians began moving to Baghdad by the mid 20th century from northern Iraq and Iran. The historic "Assyrian Quarter" of the city – Dora, which boasted a population of 150,000 Assyrians in 2003, made up over 3% of the capital's Assyrian population then.  The community has been subject to kidnappings, death threats, vandalism, and house burnings by al-Qaeda and other insurgent groups. As of the end of 2014, only 1,500 Assyrians remained in Dora and others in Karrada district. Before the war, 25,000 Armenians lived in Iraq, with majority them concentrated in Baghdad. Although the Armenian population has reduced, Baghdad is still home to the largest community of Armenians in Iraq, primarily concentrated in the Armenian quarter of Bab al-Sharqi area.
An estimated 60,000 Iraqi Turkmen live in Baghdad, with significant population in the neighborhoods of Adhamiyah and Ragheba Khatun. There is a Circassian neighborhood in the city, which is home to the largest Circassian community of Iraq. The metropolitan area and the adjoining governorate is also home to Kawliya, African Iraqis,  Chechens and other groups.

Religion
The majority of the citizens are Muslims with minorities of Christians, Yezidis, Jews and Mandeans also present. There are many religious centers distributed around the city including mosques, churches, synagogues and Mashkhannas cultic huts. The city historically has a predominantly Sunni population, but by the early 21st century around 52% of the city's population were Shi'ites. Sunni Muslims make up 29–34% of Iraq's population and they are still a majority in west and north Iraq. As early as 2003, about 20% of the population of the city was the result of mixed marriages between Shi'ites and Sunnis. Following the civil war between Sunni and Shia militia groups during the occupation of Iraq, the population of Sunnis significantly decreased as they were pushed out of many neighborhoods. Today majority of the neighborhoods are either entirely Sunni or Shi'ite. While few localities are mixed, such as Yarmouk.
The Christian community in Baghdad is divided among various denominations, mainly the Chaldean Catholic Church and the Syriac Catholic Church. There is also a significant presence of followers of the Assyrian Church of the East and the Syriac Orthodox Church, along with the largest Armenian Apostolic and Protestant communities in Iraq, which is also located in Baghdad. The city serves as the headquarters of the Chaldean Catholic Church, with its see located in the Cathedral of Our Lady of Sorrows, while the Ancient Church of the East has its see in the Cathedral of the Virgin. Before the Iraq War in 2003, Baghdad was home to 300,000–800,000 Christians, primarily concentrated in several neighborhoods with a Christian majority or significant minority, the most notable being Karrada and al–Dora, which had around 150,000 Christians. After 2003, a large number of Christians were displaced in wars and many of them fled to Baghdad after ISIS's takeover of Mosul. Today about 100,000 Christians remained in Baghdad, primarily in Karrada and Mansour district.
Baghdad was once home to one of the world's most significant Jewish communities. In 1948, Jews numbered approximately 150,000, constituting 33% of the city's population. Persecution forced most Jews to flee Iraq. Even after 1948, up to 100,000 Jews remained, which decreased. Majority of 15,000 Iraqi Jews lived in Baghdad during Saddam Hussein's rule and their population dwindled, not due to persecution but because of lifted travel restrictions that allowed many to emigrate. By 2003, Iraq still had a Jewish community of about 1,500 people, majority of whom resided in Baghdad. But the population decreased sharply after the war. Today, an estimated 160 Jews live in Baghdad out of spotlight, primarily in the old Jewish quarters of Bataween and Shorja, which was once home to vibrant Jewish community. The city was historically home to over 60 synagogues, cemeteries, and shrines, many of which were preserved before 2003. However, their condition deteriorated after the war, and only a few sites, such as the Meir Taweig Synagogue and Al-Habibiyah Jewish Cemetery, remain today.

Beyond their traditional homelands, around Amarah and Basra, Mandaeans are also found in Baghdad. By the late 20th century, Mandaeans began settling in Baghdad for better opportunities. Most of them live primarily around al-Qadisiyah and Dora, which is location to their place of worship and cultural centers. However, persecution of Mandaeans have been greatly decreased since 2003.  There is also a small of community of Baha'is and Sikhs, who live in Baghdad. The Sikhs are mostly Indians. Before 2003, Baghdad was regularly visited by Sikh pilgrims from India.

Economy
Baghdad serves as the commercial and financial hub, home to 22% of the population, and generating 40% of the Iraq's GDP. It connects trade routes between Turkey, Syria, India, and Southeast Asia. As the capital, it hosts government institutions and state enterprises, key sources of employment. The public education system follows Ba'athist socialist ideologies, for employment in the public sector. Since 2003, the public sector has struggled to provide jobs, and the private sector hasn't grown sufficiently, leading companies to hire mainly foreigners. To address this, NGOs are establishing incubation centers in the city.
Baghdad serves as headquarters for important companies of Iraq, such as Iraq National Oil Company, State Organization for Marketing of Oil and Iraqi Airways. Baghdad is home to large insurance companies and banks — Central Bank of Iraq, Rafidain Bank, and Rashid Bank and regional headquarters for First Abu Dhabi Bank, Fransabank and Saudi National Bank. Multinational companies such as Honeywell, Shell, General Electric, SalamAir and Robert Bosch GmbH have established their regional base. Baghdad is also home to Iraq Stock Exchange, that was established in 1992. Most of these establishments are located in Al-Rasheed Street, Karrada and Mansour district.
It was once one of the main destinations in the region with a wealth of cultural attractions. Tourism has diminished due to wars, but in recent years the city has a revival in tourism although still facing challenges. There are numerous historic, scientific and artistic museums in Baghdad. Religious tourism in Baghdad has grown since 2003, with sites like Al-Kadhimiya Mosque, Abu Hanifa Mosque, Mausoleum of Abdul-Qadir Gilani, and Buratha Mosque attracting visitors from Iran, Pakistan, and India, while non-religious tourists mainly come from Turkey, France, and the United States. Around 1 million people visit the city annually for religious purposes. The pilgrims are both Shia and Sunni Muslims.
The city contains the factories of carpets, leather and textiles, workshops, cement and tobacco factories. Industrial areas extend from the city center to outside and suburbs in the metropolitan area, such as Taji and northern Baghdad. Subsequently, it has produced a wide variety of consumer and industrial goods, including processed foods and beverages, clothes, footwear, wood products, furniture, paper and printed material, bricks, chemicals, plastics, electrical equipment, and metal and nonmetallic products. Bismayah, southeast of Baghdad, is home to world's largest precast factory. In agricultural aspect, palm groves are spread in the city, and many of its people depends on the cultivation of many yields.
Baghdad, like other provinces such as Babylon, Karbala and Qadissiya, contains metals such as aluminum, ceramics, nickel, manganese and chromium, whose size is not yet known, being recently discovered by local Iraqi cadres lacking experience and mechanisms to determine the size of these explorations. An oilfield is located in eastern Baghdad. It was believed that the quantities of oil is modest, but the drilling disclosed that its size exceeds the initial estimates, and has northern extensions in the province of Salah al-Din, and southern province of Wasit. The city is also home to Dora Refinery, a large oil refinery in Dora, which is the 3rd largest in Iraq in terms of production. The production of it exceeds 200,000 barrels (32,000 m3) per day, while its total production estimated if it was developed up to 120,000 barrels (19,000 m3) per day.
Most reconstruction efforts have been devoted to the restoration and repair of badly damaged urban infrastructure. Some of the private projects includes  Baghdad Renaissance Plan, Sindbad Hotel Complex and Conference Center, and Central Bank of Iraq Tower. Other project proposed includes Romantic Island and Baghdad Gate. Numerous projects have been also impacted due to corruption. According to a report published by CNBC, there are around 150 entertainment projects planned for the city. Many of them were delayed due to government policies. Also Baghdad has witnessed the opening of dozens of tourist complexes annually with areas reaching 20,000 square metres (4.9 acres) in addition to some major tourism projects with areas exceeding 50,000 square metres (12 acres) with the aim of investment combining trade and tourism as a distinctive economic model. In recent years, Baghdad has also adopted modern economic trends like, establishment of startup hubs, office space and incubation center, as well as development of shopping malls such Baghdad Mall and Dijlah Village.

Transportation
Baghdad lacks substantial public transportation, and taxis are the primary means of transportation in the city. Roads in Baghdad have been known to be especially congested since at least 2003. According to MP Jassim Al-Bukhati in 2021, "Baghdad's roads are designed to accommodate 700,000 cars, while now there are between 2.5 and 3 million cars on them". This is because, since 2003, car imports have increased. Since then, river-based water transport has become a popular mode of transport. Use of boats crossing across the river saves time for travelers escaping congestion. Private organizations are working to improve the transport system.
Among the major bridges connecting Karkh and Rusafa are 14th of July Bridge, Al-Aimmah Bridge and Al-Sarafiya Bridge. In 2023, the authorities announced plans to build 19 bridges in Baghdad. This is a part of its post-war reconstruction efforts, as many bridges were damaged during the war. Streets, avenues and alleys form an important part of the transport network. Al-Sa'doun Street stretches from Liberation Square to Masbah. Abu Nuwas Street runs along the Tigris from the Jumhouriya Bridge to 14 July Suspended Bridge. Damascus Street goes from Damascus Square to the Baghdad Airport Road. Hilla Road runs from the north into Baghdad via Yarmouk. Mutanabbi Street is a street with numerous bookshops, named after the 10th century Iraqi poet Al-Mutanabbi. Caliphs Street is the site of historical mosques and churches.

Air transport
Iraqi Airways, the national airline of Iraq, operates out of Baghdad International Airport in Baghdad. The airport was opened by Saddam Hussein in 1982 as Saddam International Airport. It was closed as result of the Gulf War and subsequent embargo. The airport was reopened in August 2000. The airport adopted its current name after the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

Planned Baghdad Metro
The Baghdad Metro project was first proposed during the 1970s but did not come to fruition due to wars and sanctions. After the Iraq war, Iraqi authorities intended to revive the project, but it was again delayed due to domestic instability. In 2019, it was reported that Korean Hyundai and French Alstom would be building the metro. However, the planned construction did not happen.
As of February 2024, the current plan consisted of fully electric and automated (driverless) trains running on an extensive railway network including an underground railway portion as well as an elevated railway. The proposed Baghdad Metro system includes seven main lines with a total length of more than 148 kilometres, 64 metro stations, four workshops and depots for trains, several operations control centers (OCC) and seven main power stations (MPS) with a capacity of 250 mega-watts, and several Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) towers. The metro will be equipped with CCTV and internet as well as USB ports for charging. Special compartments will be allocated for women and children as well as seats for people with special needs, pregnant women, and the elderly. The metro stations will be connected to other public transport networks such as buses and taxis, and 10 parking spaces will be available for commuters. The planned operating speed will be 80–140 km/hour with an estimated 3.25 million riders per day.
In July 2024, it was announced that an international consortium of German French, Spanish, and Turkish companies was awarded $17.5 billion contract to construct Baghdad's metro. The consortium includes Alstom, Systra, SNCF, Talgo, Deutsche Bank and SENER. The consortium was then to negotiate the technical, financial and operational details of the project which is now estimated to be completed in May 2029.

Cityscape
The Round City was the core of the city, during the establishment of Baghdad. It ceased to exist, as a result of the Mongolian siege. Urban features such as streets, avenues, alleyways and squares clusters a large number of landmarks, which itself creates an identity of cultural or intellectual hubs and define the beauty of Baghdad.
Al-Rasheed Street is one of the most significant landmarks in Baghdad. Located in al-Rusafa area, the street was an artistic, intellectual and cultural center for many Baghdadis. It also included many prominent theaters and nightclubs such as the Crescent Theatre where Egyptian Singer Umm Kulthum sang during her visit in 1932 as well as the Chakmakji Company that recorded the music of various Arab singers. The street also contains famous and well-known landmarks including the ancient Haydar-Khana Mosque as well as numerous well-known cafés such as al-Zahawi Café and the Brazilian Café.
Mutanabbi Street is located near the old quarter of Baghdad; at Al-Rasheed Street. It is the historic center of Baghdadi book-selling, a street filled with bookstores and outdoor book stalls. It was named after the 10th-century classical Iraqi poet Al-Mutanabbi. This street is well established for bookselling and has often been referred to as the heart and soul of the Baghdad literacy and intellectual community. Firdos Square is a public open space in Baghdad and the location of two of the best-known hotels, the Palestine Hotel and the Sheraton Ishtar, which are both also the tallest buildings in Baghdad. The square was the site of the statue of Saddam Hussein that was pulled down by the coalition forces in a widely televised event during the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
Qushla or Qishla is a public square and the historical complex located in al-Rusafa neighborhood at the riverbank of Tigris. The place and its surroundings is where the historical features and cultural capitals of Baghdad are concentrated, from the Mutanabbi Street, Abbasid-era palace and bridges, Ottoman-era mosques to the Mustansariyah Madrasa. The square developed during the Ottoman era as a military barracks. Today, it is a place where the citizens of Baghdad find leisure such as reading poetry in gazebos. It is characterized by the iconic clock tower which was donated by George V. The entire area is submitted to the UNESCO World Heritage Site Tentative list.

Architecture
During the 1970s and 1980s, Saddam Hussein's government spent a lot of money on new monuments, mosques, palaces and hotels. The Street is also notable for its architecture and aesthetic which was inspired by Renaissance architecture and also includes the famous Iraqi shanasheel.

Modern Landmarks
The National Museum of Iraq whose collection of artifacts was looted during the invasion, and the iconic Hands of Victory arches. Multiple political parties are in discussions as to whether the arches should remain as historical monuments or be dismantled. Thousands of ancient manuscripts in the National Library were destroyed under Saddam's command.
Grand Festivities Square is the main square where public celebrations are held and is also the home to three important monuments commemorating Iraqi's fallen soldiers and victories in war; namely Al-Shaheed Monument, the Victory Arch and the Unknown Soldier's Monument. Al-Shaheed Monument, also known as the Martyr's Memorial, is a monument dedicated to the Iraqi soldiers who died in the Iran–Iraq War. However, now it is generally considered by Iraqis to be for all of the martyrs of Iraq, especially those allied with Iran and Syria fighting ISIS, not just of the Iran–Iraq War. The monument was opened in 1983, and was designed by the Iraqi architect Saman Kamal and the Iraqi sculptor and artist Ismail Fatah Al Turk. Though these works symbolize the ruling entity. Neverthelsess, they have remained part of architectural legacy, which beautified Baghdad.
Masjid Al-Kadhimain is a shrine that is located in the Kādhimayn suburb of Baghdad. It contains the tombs of the seventh and ninth Twelver Shi'ite Imams, Musa al-Kadhim and Muhammad at-Taqi respectively, upon whom the title of Kādhimayn ("Two who swallow their anger") was bestowed. Many Shi'ites travel to the mosque from far away places to commemorate those imams. A'dhamiyyah is a predominantly Sunni area with a Mosque that is associated with the Sunni Imam Abu Hanifa. The name of Al-Aʿẓamiyyah is derived from Abu Hanifa's title, al-Imām al-Aʿẓam (the Great Imam).
The historic Jewish quarters of Bataween and Shorja is home to numerous sites that are associated with Jews. These sites were preserved during the Ba'athist regime. However, after 2003, many of them are in poor conditions. Meir Taweig Synagogue is the only active synagogue of Iraq, which have a large compound, that consist of community center, Jewish school and library. Daniel Market (Souq Danial), which was named after Menahem Saleh Daniel, still bears the same name. It is popular for fabrics and shoes. The Great Synagogue of Baghdad, the oldest synagogue of Iraq, is now restored as a museum. Al-Habibiyah Cemetery is the largest Jewish cemetery in Baghdad, home to around 1,000 graves. The Tomb of Joshua, now a Muslim shrine, is believed to be the burial site of Joshua. Shaykh Yitzhak Tomb and Synagogue was preserved until 2003. Today it is neglected. Other sites includes House of Sassoon Eskell and library of Mir Basri.
The Sabian–Mandaean Mandi of Baghdad is a Mandaen temple in al-Qadisiyyah. It is the main community center for Mandaeans in Iraq. Plans are underway to demolish and build a larger one to accommodate more worshippers. A cultural institute for Mandeans is also in Baghdad. The city is home to Baba Nanak Shrine, a sacred site in Sikhism. It was destroyed during the Iraq War in 2003. In the Kadhimiya district of Baghdad, was the house of Baháʼu'lláh, (Prophet Founder of the Baha'i Faith) also known as the "Most Great House" (Bayt-i-Aʻzam) and the "House of God", where Baháʼu'lláh mostly resided from 1853 to 1863. It is considered a holy place and a place of pilgrimage by Baha'is according to their "Most Holy Book". On 23 June 2013, the house was destroyed under unclear circumstances.

Baghdad Zoo used to be the largest zoological park in the Middle East. Within eight days following the 2003 invasion, however, only 35 of the 650 animals in the facility survived. This was a result of theft of some animals for human food, and starvation of caged animals that had no food. Conservationist Lawrence Anthony and some of the zoo keepers cared for the animals and fed the carnivores with donkeys they had bought locally. Eventually Paul Bremer, Director of the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq after the invasion, ordered protection for the zoo and enlisted U.S. engineers to help reopen the facility. Al-Zawraa Park is also part of the zoo, which is main urban park of the city.

Education
The House of Wisdom was a major academy and public center in Baghdad. The Mustansiriya Madrasa was established in 1227 by the Abbasid Caliph al-Mustansir. The name was changed to al-Mustansiriya University in 1963. The University of Baghdad is the largest university in Iraq and the second largest in the Arab world. Prior to the Gulf War, multiple international schools operated in Baghdad, including:

École française de Bagdad
Deutsche Schule Bagdad
Baghdad Japanese School (バグダッド日本人学校), a nihonjin gakko

Universities
University of Baghdad
Mustansiriya University
Iraqi University
Nahrain University
Albayan University
University of Technology
American University of Iraq - Baghdad
Al-Turath University College
Dijlah University College

Culture
Baghdad has always played a significant role in the broader Arab cultural sphere, contributing several significant writers, musicians and visual artists. Historically, the city had a vibrant modern culture and lifestyle. Famous Arab poets and singers such as Nizar Qabbani, Umm Kulthum, Fairuz, Salah Al-Hamdani, Ilham al-Madfai and others have performed for the city. The dialect of Arabic spoken in Baghdad today differs from that of other large urban centers in Iraq, having features more characteristic of nomadic Arabic dialects (Versteegh, The Arabic Language). It is possible that this was caused by the repopulating of the city with rural residents after the multiple sackings of the late Middle Ages. For poetry written about Baghdad, see Reuven Snir (ed.), Baghdad: The City in Verse (Harvard, 2013). Baghdad joined the UNESCO Creative Cities Network as a City of Literature in December 2015.
Some of the important cultural institutions in the city include the National Theater, which was looted during the 2003 invasion of Iraq, but efforts are underway to restore the theater. The live theater industry received a boost during the 1990s, when UN sanctions limited the import of foreign films. As many as 30 movie theaters were reported to have been converted to live stages, producing a wide range of comedies and dramatic productions. Institutions offering cultural education in Baghdad include The Music and Ballet School of Baghdad and the Institute of Fine Arts Baghdad. The Iraqi National Symphony Orchestra is a government funded symphony orchestra in Baghdad. The INSO plays primarily classical European music, as well as original compositions based on Iraqi and Arab instruments and music. Mandaeans had cultural club in Al-Zawraa, where poetry evenings and cultural seminars were held, attended by poets, writers, artists, officials, and dignitaries of the communities. There is also a social cultural center of Mandaeans at al-Qadisiyyah. Baghdad Jewish Community Center is located in Al-Rashid Street.
Baghdad is also home to a number of museums which housed artifacts and relics of ancient civilization; many of these were stolen, and the museums looted, during the widespread chaos immediately after United States forces entered the city.
During occupation of Iraq, AFN Iraq ("Freedom Radio") broadcast news and entertainment within Baghdad, among other locations. There is also a private radio station called "Dijlah" (named after the Arabic word for the Tigris River) that was created in 2004 as Iraq's first independent talk radio station. Radio Dijlah offices, in the Jamia neighborhood of Baghdad, have been attacked on several occasions.

Sport
Baghdad is home to some of the most successful football (soccer) teams in Iraq, the biggest being Al-Shorta (Police), Al-Quwa Al-Jawiya (Air Force), Al-Zawraa, and Al-Talaba (Students). The largest stadium in Baghdad is Al-Shaab Stadium, which was opened in 1966. In recent years, the capital has seen the building of several football stadiums which are meant be opened in near future. The city has also had a strong tradition of horse racing ever since World War I, known to Baghdadis simply as 'Races'. There are reports of pressures by the Islamists to stop this tradition due to the associated gambling.

Twin towns – sister cities
Cairo, Egypt
 Baku, Azerbaijan
 Pyongyang, North Korea
 Tehran, Iran
 Amman, Jordan
 Damascus, Syria
 Beirut, Lebanon
 Jerusalem (East), Palestine
 Bucharest, Romania

See also
Iraqi art
List of mosques in Baghdad
List of places in Iraq
History of the Jews in Baghdad
Battle of Baghdad (2003)
Baghdad Ziyarat Tour

Notes
References
Sources
Defrémery, C.; Sanguinetti, B. R., eds. (1854), Voyages d'Ibn Batoutah (in French and Arabic), vol. 2, Paris: Société Asiatic
Dunn, Ross E. (2005), The Adventures of Ibn Battuta, University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-24385-9

Further reading
Articles
A Dweller in Mesopotamia, being the adventures of an official artist in the Garden of Eden, by Donald Maxwell, 1921 (a searchable facsimile at the University of Georgia Libraries; DjVu & "layered PDF" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 September 2005. (7.53 MB) format)
By Desert Ways to Baghdad, by Louisa Jebb (Mrs. Roland Wilkins), 1908 (1909 ed) (a searchable facsimile at the University of Georgia Libraries; DjVu & "layered PDF" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 September 2005. (11.3 MB) format)
Miastoprojekt goes abroad: the transfer of architectural labour from socialist Poland to Iraq (1958–1989) by Lukasz Stanek, The Journal of Architecture, Volume 17, Issue 3, 2012

Books
Caecilia Pieri, Bagdad, la construction d'une capitale moderne, 1914–1960, Presses de l'Ifpo, 2015, 440 pages, about 800 illustrations (ISBN 978-2-35159-399-8) (ISSN 2225-7578).
Mina Marefat, Caecilia Pieri, Gilles Ragot, Le Corbusier's Gymnasium in Bagdad, 2014, Éditions du patrimoine, collection Regards (French and English versions), Presses de l'Ifpo (Arabic version) (ISBN 2757703013).
Pieri, Caecilia (2011). Baghdad Arts Deco: Architectural Brickwork, 1920–1950 (1st ed.). The American University in Cairo Press. p. 160. ISBN 978-977-416-356-2.
"Travels in Asia and Africa 1325-135" by Ibn Battuta.
"Gertrude Bell: The Arabian Diaries, 1913–1914." by Bell Gertrude Lowthian, and O'Brien, Rosemary.
"Historic Cities of the Islamic World". by Bosworth, Clifford Edmund.
"Ottoman administration of Iraq, 1890–1908." by Cetinsaya, Gokhan.
"Naked in Baghdad." by Garrels, Anne, and Lawrence, Vint.
"A memoir of Major-General Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson." by Rawlinson, George.
Stanek, Łukasz (2020). Architecture in Global Socialism: Eastern Europe, West Africa, and the Middle East in the Cold War. Princeton. ISBN 978-0-691-19455-4.

External links

Amanat/Mayoralty of Baghdad
Map of Baghdad Archived 30 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine
Iraq Image – Baghdad Satellite Observation
National Commission for Investment in Iraq
Interactive map
Iraq – Urban Society
– Baghdad government websites Archived 22 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Envisioning Reconstruction In Iraq
Description of the original layout of Baghdad
Ethnic and sectarian map of Baghdad – Healingiraq
Man With A Plan: Hisham Ashkouri
Behind Baghdad's 9/11
Iraq Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit Reports, maps and assessments of Iraq from the UN Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit
 Geographic data related to Baghdad at OpenStreetMap


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 9,394
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A8%D8%BA%D8%AF%D8%A7%D8%AF
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

بَغْدَاد هيَ عَاصِمَة جُمْهُوريَّة العِرَاق، ومَرْكَزُ محافظة بَغْدَاد. في عام 2016 بلغَ عَددُ سُكانها حَوالي 8.5 مَليون نَسَمة، مَا يَجعَلها أكبر مَدِينة في العِرَاق وثانِي أكبر مَدِينة في الوَطَنِ العَرَبي بَعْد القَاهِرةِ. وتأتي بالمَرتبة 40 عالميًا من حيث عدد السكان. وتُعد المَدِينة المَركز الاقْتِصَاديّ والإدَاريّ والتَعليمِيّ في الدَّوْلَة.
بناها الخليفة العباسي أبو جعفر المنصور في القرن الثامن الميلادي واتخذها عاصمةً للدولة العباسية؛ أصبح لبغداد بعدها مكانة عظيمة، فكانت أهم مراكز العلم على تنوعه في العالم وملتقى للعلماء والدارسين لعدة قرون من الزمن. وتمثل بغداد حاليًا حالةً من حالات التتابع المدني في إطار موقع واحد، ففي إطار موقع الرافدين تتابعت العواصم من بابل القديمة إلى سلوقية الإغريقية وطيسفون الفارسية، التي كانت تعرف بمدائن كسرى، ثم بغداد العربية الحالية.
كانت بغداد أكبر مدينة في العالم لمُعظم فَترة حُكْم بَنو العَباس خلال العصر الذهبي الإسلامي، بِحَيث بلغَ عَدد سُكانها أكثر من مِليون نَسمة. وصلت مدينة بغداد لذروتها في عصر الخليفة العباسي الخامس هارون الرشيد وارتبطت باسمه في روايات ألف ليلة وليلة ذات الشهرة العالمية، حيث باتت عاصمة العالم القديم. وقد فقدت هذه المكانة منذ عام 1258 عندما غزاها المغول والتتار. مع حلول بدايات القرن السادس عشر، تبادل الصفويون والعثمانيون السيطرة على المدينة، حتى انتزعها العثمانيون أخيراً في عام 1535، فظلت تحت حكمهم قرابة 4 قرون. وفي عام 1917، سيطر الإنجليز على المدينة، وقد خضعت كمعظم مناطق العراق الأخرى تحت الانتداب البريطاني، ثم أصبحت عاصمة للمملكة العراقية عام 1921، والجمهورية العراقية عام 1958.
تكمن أهمية موقع بغداد الجغرافي في توافر المياه وتناقص أخطار الفيضانات، ما أدى بدوره إلى اتساع رقعة المدينة وزيادة نفوذها إلى جانب سهولة اتصالها عبر نهر دجلة بواسطة الجسور التي تربطها عبر جوانب النهر، والذي يخترق مركزها لينصفه إلى جُزْأَين هما الكرخ والرصافة. وتتشكل المدينة اليوم من 27 منطقة، تنقسم بدورها إلى عدة أحياء.
تمتاز بغداد بأهميتها الثقافية التي تتمثل بوجود عدد كبير من الصروح المهمة كالمتاحف والمدارس التاريخية والمكتبات والمسارح. وتشتهر المدينة بآثارها الإسلامية التي تتمثل ببقايا أسوار مدينة بغداد، ودار الخلافة، والمدرسة المستنصرية. ولبغداد القديمة أسماء عدة كالمدينة المدورة والزوراء ودار السلام.

التاريخ
أظهرت التنقيبات الأثرية أن بغداد كانت في الفترات القديمة موطنًا بشريًا مهما يعود إلى العصر الآشوري قبل اختيارها لتكون عاصمة للخلافة العباسية. ومما جعل لهذا الموقع أهميته الجغرافية والاستراتيجية توسطه مدنًا حضارية إنسانية كبرى تمتد من شمال العراق إلى جنوبه. إن هذا الموقع الجغرافي التاريخي جعل بغداد تتبوأ موقعًا متوسطًا بين تلك المدن الأمر الذي شكل بيئة ملائمة لتطور الإنسان وإنجازاته الحضارية والفكرية. وفي العصور التي سبقت الفتح الإسلامي وما بعده، كانت المنطقة التي عرفت في بغداد في العهد العباسي تحيط بها مدن لها أهميتها الاستراتيجية والجغرافية. وتقع مدينة بغداد شمال موقع مدينة بابل الأثرية، إضافةً إلى أنها تقع على بعد بضعة كيلومترات شمال غرب مدينة قطيسفون (المدائن) التي بناها الإغريق قبل الميلاد وورثها الفرس، والتي استمرت كمركز رئيس للبلاد حتى حلت محلها بغداد في القرن الثامن.

بُنيت بغداد في العصر العباسي بين عاميّ 762 و 764 م. وأُطلق عليها في القديم اسم الزوراء، ومدينة السلام، وكانت ذات يوم عاصمة الدنيا، ومركز الخلافة الإسلامية العباسية. بناها الخليفة العباسي أبو جعفر المنصور، وسماها مدينة المنصور، وجعل لها أربعةُ أبواب هي: باب خُراسان، (وكان يسمى باب الدولة)، وبابُ الشام، ثم بابُ الكوفةِ، ثم باب البصرة. وكان المنصور قد اختار لها هذه البقعة من الأرض على ضفتي نهر دجلة. تزخرُ بغدادُ بالكثيرِ من المعالمِ التاريخية والحضارية، أهمها المدرسة المستنصرية، والمساجد الإسلامية القديمة، والقصور الأثرية، وبها عدد من المقامات الدينية، أهمها مقاما الإمامين موسى الكاظم ومحمد الجواد بالكاظمية، ومقام أبي حنيفة النعمان، ومقام الشيخ عبد القادر الجيلاني وجامع الخلفاء العباسي المعروف قديمًا بجامع القصر أو جامع الخليفة، وجامع الحيدرخانة وهو من أتقنِ جوامع بغداد صِنعة وإحكامًا
يوجد بالمدينة متاحف تعرض فيه الآثار المختلفة من جواهر وعملات وهياكل بشرية وتماثيل من عصور ما قبل التاريخ حتى القرن السابع عشر الميلادي.

العصر العباسي
كان سبب بناء بغداد في العصر العباسي، أن أبو جعفر المنصور بنى الهاشمية قبالة مدينة ابن هبيرة بينهما عرض الطريق، وكانت مدينة ابن هبيرة التي بحيالها مدينة أبي جعفر الهاشمية إلى جانب الكوفة، وبنى المنصور أيضاً مدينة بظهر الكوفة سماها الرصافة. فلما ثارت الراوندية بأبي جعفر في مدينته التي تسمى الهاشمية، كره سكناها لاضطراب من اضطرب أمره عليه من الراوندية مع قرب جواره من الكوفة ولم يأمن أهلها على نفسه فأراد أن يبعد من جوارهم فذكر أنه خرج بنفسه يرتاد لها موضعاً يتخذه مسكناً لنفسه وجنده ويبتني به مدينة فبدأ فانحدر إلى جرجرايا ثم صار إلى بغداد ثم مضى إلى الموصل ثم عاد إلى بغداد فقال هذا موضع معسكر صالح هذه دجلة ليس بيننا وبين الصين شيء يأتينا فيها كل ما في البحر وتأتينا الميرة من الجزيرة وأرمينيا وما حول ذلك وهذا الفرات يجيء فيه كل شيء من الشام والرقة وما حول ذلك فنزل وضرب عسكره على الصراة وخط المدينة ووكل بكل ربع قائدًا.
اختار أبو جعفر المنصور موقع بغداد على رقعة مرتفعة من الأرض على الجانب الغربي من نهر دجلة عند مصب نهر الرفيل فيه والتي بدأ العمل في بنائها بتاريخ الثالث والعشرين من تموز من عام سبعمئة واثنان وستين ميلادية. وكانت تحيط بهذا الموقع قرى مأهولة السكان مزدهرة أهمها: بغداد البالية القديمة، وسونيا الآرامية، والخطابية، وشرفانية، وبناورا، وورثاه، وبراثا، وقطغتا، والوردانية. وكان هناك جسر على دجلة، و دير للنصارى. وكانت الأرض التي تحيطها سهلة زراعية تسقيها مياه ترع تتفرع من نهر الرفيل الواسع الذي يأخذ من نهر الفرات ويبعد عن بغداد نحو 30 كيلومترا، ومن نهر الدجيل الذي يأخذ مياهه من دجلة في شماليها. وهذه الأراضي المزروعة كانت واسعة تنتج محاصيل زراعية وافرة، ويقابلها في شرقي دجلة أراض منبسطة أيضاً تروي مزارعها أنهار وترع عدة.
من جهة أخرى، ذُكر عن عيسى بن المنصور أنه قال: "وجدت في خزائن أبي المنصور في الكتب أنه أنفق على مدينة السلام وجامعها وقصر الذهب بها والأسواق والفصلان والخنادق وقبابها وأبوابها أربعة آلاف ألف وثمانمئة وثلاثين درهماً ومبلغها من الفلوس مئة ألف ألف فلس وثلاثة وعشرون ألف فلس وذلك أن الأستاذ من البنائين كان يعمل يومه بقيراط فضة والروزكاي بحبتين إلى ثلاث حبات. وكانت مدينة بغداد مدورة ويبلغ طول قطرها نحو 2615 مترا، وأحيطت بخندق وسورين بينهما ساحة واسعة. ورسم في داخلها سكك (شوارع أو أزقة) عديدة على كل منها عدد من الطاقات، وكل هذه السكك مستقيمة تمتد من السور إلى رحبة واسعة في وسط المدينة المدورة، وخص المنصور أبا حنيفة النعمان بالإشراف عليها فكان المشرف العام على بنائها أربعة أعوام، وعندما انتهى البناء نقل مجالس علمه إليها، حتى توفي في عام 150 هـ.

بتولِي هارون الرشيد الحكم بدأ عصر زاهر كان واسطة العقد في تاريخ الدولة العباسية التي دامت أكثر من خمسة قرون، ارتقت فيه العلوم، وسمت الفنون والآداب، وعمَّ الرخاء ربوع الدولة الإسلامية. ولقد أمسك هارون الرشيد بزمام هذه الدولة وهو في نحو الثانية والعشرين من عمرهِ، فأخذ بيدها إلى ما أبهر الناس من مجدها وقوتها وازدهار حضارتها.

أصدر الرشيد عند توليه الخلافة عفوا عاما أمن كل من كان هاربا أو مستخفيا عدا بعض الزنادقة.
وأنشأ بما يعرف ببيت الحكمة في بغداد وزوّدها بأعداد كبيرة من الكتب والمؤلفات من مختلف بقاع الأرض. وكانت تضم غرفًا عديدة تمتد بينها أروقة طويلة، وخُصصت بعضها للكتب، وبعضها للمحاضرات، وبعضها الآخر للناسخين والمترجمين والمجلدين. كما تمت في عهده أول ترجمة إلى العربية لأشهر كتاب علمي عرف في التاريخ وهو "كتاب الأصول (الأركان) في الهندسة والعدد لإقليدس ، وتطورت العلوم خصوصًا الفيزياء الفلكية والتقنية، وابتكرت عدد من الاختراعات كالساعة المائية. كما أنشئ في عهده أول مصنع للورق ببغداد سنة 795 م وصار سوق الوراقين لاحقا الذي يضم مئات الحوانيت التي تبيع السلع الورقية الفاخرة مفخرة عاصمة العباسيين وكان ورق بغداد يقدر تقديرا عاليا في المنطقة حتى أن بعض المصادر البيزنطية تسمي الورق بصحف بغداد (Bagdatixon) في ربط مباشر بينه وبين مدينة بغداد
أنشأ الخليفة العباسي هارون الرشيد أكبر مستشفى في بغداد، سماها بإسمه، ضمت في كادرها أمهر الأطباء، وتولى إدارتها كل من يوحنا بن ماسويه وجبريل بن بختيشوع، وكانت أشهر مستشفى في العالم القديم.
اهتم هارون الرشيد بالإصلاحات الداخلية فبنى المساجد الكبيرة والقصور الفخمة وفي عهده استعملت القناديل لأول مرة في إضاءة الطرقات والمساجد. اعتنى الرشيد أيضًا بالزراعة وأسس نظامها، فبنت حكومته الجسور والقناطر الكبيرة وحفرت الترع والجداول الموصلة بين الأنهار، وأسس ديوانًا خاصًا للإشراف على تنفيذ تلك الأعمال الإصلاحية، ومن أعماله أيضًا تشجيع التبادل التجاري بين الولايات وحراسة طرق التجارة بين المدن، وقد شيّد مدينة الواقفة قرب مدينة الرقة على ضفاف الفرات لتكون مقرًا صيفيًا لحكمه.
غدت بغداد قبلة طلاب العلم من جميع البلاد، يرحلون إليها حيث كبار الفقهاء والمحدثين والقراء واللغويين، وكانت المساجد الجامعة تحتضن دروسهم وحلقاتهم العلمية التي كان كثير منها أشبه بالمدارس العليا، من حيث غزارة العلم، ودقة التخصص، وحرية الرأي والمناقشة، وثراء الجدل والحوار. كما جذبت المدينة الأطباء والمهندسين وسائر الصناع. وكان الرشيد نفسه يميل إلى أهل الأدب والفقه والعلم، حتى ذاع صيت الرشيد وطبق الآفاق ذكره، وأرسلت بلاد الهند والصين وأوروبا رسلها إلى بلاطهِ تخطب وده، وتطلب صداقته.وقع خلاف بعد عامين من وفاة الرشيد بين ولديه الأمين والمأمون، وحوصرت بغداد لأول مرة في تاريخها ودام الحصار أربعة عشر شهراً. وفي نهاية عام 812 أطبق جند هرثمة وطاهر قائدي المأمون على الأمين في بغداد وعزل هرثمة الجانب الشرقي الذي لم يكن يحميه سوى سور سرعان ما أزاله، بينما عسكر طاهر أمام باب الأنبار فسيطر بذلك على الجانب الغربي، ووجد الخليفة نفسه آخر الأمر منعزلاً في قصر الخلد على شاطئ دجلة وما لبث أن وقع في الأسر وهو يحاول الفرار وقُتل في أوائل عام 814، وبموته رُفع الحصار وأصبحت بغداد المزدهرة خرائب ورماداً، وأثار موت الأمين سخط أهل بغداد، وتمكن إبراهيم بن المهدي العباسي بفضل الخلاف بين الناس من أن يستولي على بغداد ويصبح صاحب الأمر فيها ما يقرب من عامين غير أن خيانة قواده أجبرته على تسليم المدينة وزمام الحكم إلى الخليفة المأمون. وكانت بطانة المأمون من الفرس تحاول نقل عاصمة الخلافة إلى خراسان ليتم لهم التغلب على شئون الدولة، وتولى الحسن بن سهل العراق والحجاز واليمن فاضطرب حبل الأمن ودبت الفتن في بغداد إلى أن دخلها المأمون عام 820، وعادت لبغداد شيء من نضرتها إلى أن أدركته منيته عام 834، وقد عهد المأمون بالخلافة من بعده لأخيه المعتصم، وظلت بغداد تموج بالفتن حتى أنه في عام 1157 لم يبقَ من تلك المملكة المترامية الأطراف إلا بغداد وأعمالها وقليل مما يتصل بها. وقد انتقلت العاصمة العباسية في زمن المعتصم عام 837 من بغداد إلى سامراء، وقد أعادها الخليفة العباسي المعتمد عام 893 إلى بغداد، وأقام في دار الخلافة بالجانب الشرقي من نهر دجلة.
في منتصف القرن العاشر، استولى آل بويه على بغداد، والذين يرجع نسبهم إلى ملوك الفرس الساسانيين. وقد كان ذلك الاستيلاء في عام 945 بقيادة أحمد معز الدولة، والذي أعلن نفسه حاميا على الخلافة حتى 1055، حيث كان حكم الخليفة في بغداد صوريًا. وقد شجّع البويهيون على نشر المذهب الشيعي في المنطقة. تصارعت فروع الأسرة فيما بينها فعمت الاضطرابات أرجاء الدولة. انتهى الأمر بأن قُسمت دولة إلى فرعين، أولهما في العراق والآخر في كرمان. قضى الغزنويون على فرع البويهيين في الري سنة 1023، ثم أنهى السلاجقة ما تبقى من دولتهم وحلوا محلهم في بغداد.
ينتمي السلاجقة إلى إحدى العشائر المتزعمة لقبائل الغز التركية. وقد توسعت الدولة السلجوقية في أنحاء مختلفة من تركيا وإيران، حتى استولت على العراق سنة 1055، بعد القضاء على دولة البويهيين في بغداد، وأعلنوا نفسهم كحاميين للخلافة العباسية. وقد استمر حكمهم لأراضٍ شاسعة حتى قضى عليهم الخوارزمشاهات سنة 1194.

المغول والتتار
كان المغول تحت قيادة جنكيز خان قد دمروا ولاية خوارزم شاه عند وفاة الخليفة أبو العباس أحمد الناصر لدين الله في 1225، واحتلوا معظم أقسام إيران الشمالية. تمكن جيش الخليفة العباسي المستنصر، حفيد الناصر من دحر الهجوم المغولي على أراضي العراق العربية. وتحت حكم ابنه المستعصم، حاصر المغول بغداد في 1245 دون تحقيق نجاح. إلا أن الفيضانات الفظيعة التي حدثت في الأعوام 1243، 1253، 1255 و 1256 خلخلت دفاعات المدينة، وخيرات المنطقة وثقة المواطنين.
في عام 1258، طُوقت بغداد بقوة مغولية كبيرة يقودها هولاكو، حفيد جنكيزخان، الذي كان قد أُرسل من منغوليا خصوصًا لكي يتعامل مع العباسيين. وقد سقطت المدينة في 10 شباط/ فبراير 1258، كما اندلعت في أثنائها نيران فتن داخلية انتهت باستيلاء التتار عليها وبقتل الخليفة المستعصم وأولاده ورجال حاشيته وأهل بطانته، وباستباحة بغداد مدة طويلة، وكانت بغداد حين حاصرها المغول غاصة بأهل الأطراف من الذين أجفلوا أمام الجيش المغولي الذين لم يرحموا شيخاً ولا طفلاً ولا امرأة، وبهذا أفلت شمس الخلافة العباسية في بغداد بعد أن أشرقت عليها أكثر من خمسة قرون، وكان أفولها كارثة على الأمم الإسلامية كافة. وقد أبقى هولاكو في أول الأمر الأوضاع الإدارية في بغداد على النمط العباسي تقريباً، ورتب جماعة من الرقباء والأمناء ليشرفوا على كل شيء، وبذلك أصبحت حكومة بغداد مدنية تحت إشراف حكومة عسكرية.

لقد دمّر المغول معظم مدينة بغداد فعليا، ويُقال أن 800,000 نسمة من سكانها قد أبيدوا. كما خُفضت منزلة المدينة إداريا إلى مركز ولاية. أما بقية المدن في المنطقة العربية من العراق مثل الحلة والكوفة والبصرة فقد رضخت إلى شروط الغازي وأبقيت على حالتها. أما الموصل في شمال العراق فقد أصبحت عاصمة ولاية دياربكر وديار ربيعة. كانت هاتان الولايتان تابعتين مثل المناطق العربية في العراق إلى سياسة دولة الخان الثانية المغولية، والتي كان مقرها في أذربيجان، التي بدورها كانت تابعة إلى دولة الخان العظيم في الصين.
لقد خلفت بغداد مدن عدة في المنطقة مثل تبريز، والتي ظهرت كمركز تجاري رئيس وقاعدة سياسية في المنطقة. أخذ حكم المغول في بغداد والموصل عموما طابع الحكم المشترك الذي يشمل الإداريين المدنين من المسلمين والمسيحين واليهود يسندهم آمر معسكر المغول. وبصورة عامة فإن العراق مر بفترة من الانهيار السياسي والاقتصادي استمر لغاية القرن السادس عشر.
في منتصف القرن الرابع عشر، حكم الجلائريون بغداد. وهم أحد العشائر المغولية، لكنها تنتمي إلى تجمع قبائل مختلف عن الذي ينحدر منه جنكيز خان، كما كان مواطنهم في بلاد ما وراء النهر. وقد انتزع الشيخ حسن برزك السلطة في بغداد سنة 1336، ثم حكم بصفة مستقلة منذ 1340. تنازعت هذه السلالة مع القائد المغولي تيمورلنك لحكم العراق، مما أدى به إلى غزو بغداد وطردهم منها سنة 1393. وقد عاد الجلائريون مرة أخرى سنة 1395 إلى المدينة، ثم كانت النتيجة أن عاد إليها تيمورلنك، ودمرها عن آخرها سنة 1401. عاد الجلائريون مجددا إلى بغداد سنة 1406، فقامت قبائل القراقويونلو (الخراف السود) التركمانية بإجلاء آخر الجلائريين عن بغداد سنة 1411. بقي للأسرة حكام في كل من البصرة وخراسان، واستمروا حتى سنة 1432، عندما قضى التركمان عليهم نهائيًا. وظلت بغداد تحت الحكم التركماني من هذا التاريخ حتى عام 1509.

الصفويون والعثمانيون
سيطر الصفويون على المدينة في عام 1509 بقيادة الشاه إسماعيل الصفوي. وبقيت تحت حكم الصفويين حتى انتزعها العثمانيون من يد الصفويين عام 1535، ولكن ما لبث الصفويون أن عادوا ليسيطروا عليها عام 1624م، وحدثت فيها مذبحة عند دخول جيش الشاه، وبقت تحت الحكم الصفوي حتى عام 1639م، حيث دخلها السلطان العثماني مراد الرابع عام 1638م.

من جهة أخرى، شهدت بغداد في الفترة الممتدة من 1749 – 1831 حكم مماليك العراق حيث لم يكن للعثمانيين دور مباشر في حكم العراق. وقد بلغت دولة المماليك في العراق أوج قوتها في عهد سليمان باشا الكبير والذي دام حكمه 22 عاما (أنظر: تاريخ بغداد بعد سقوط المماليك).
كانت بغداد تحت الحكم العثماني مركزا لإيالة بغداد ابتداء من عام 1535 وحتى عام 1864، حيث أصبحت بعدها مركزا لولاية بغداد. وقد تأسست بلدية المدينة في عام 1868، كما تم تعيين إبراهيم الدفتري أول رئيس بلدية لها. وتمثل سنة 1869 أهمية كبيرة في تاريخ بغداد في العصر العثماني، حيث بدأ فيها ما يمكن اعتباره عهدًا متميزًا من عهود العثمانيين وضع أسسه الوالي مدحت باشا بتطبيقه لعدد من الأنظمة والقوانين الإصلاحية التي شرعتها الدولة خلال عهد الإصلاحات وإعادة البناء الذي أطلق عليه عهد التنظيمات. وكان من مُجمل أهمية بغداد للعثمانيين أن جعلوا مقر الفيلقِ السادس في الجيش العثماني في المدينة. وقد بقيت بغداد تحت الحكم العثماني حتى سقوط الدولة العثمانية وقدوم الإنجليز في عام 1917.

الانتداب البريطاني
كان أول نزول للقوات البريطانية على أرض العراق في شهر أيلول/ سبتمبر سنة 1914 من منطقة الفاو، وهي بلدة تقع أقصى الجنوب تطل على الخليج العربي. وقد أرسلت القوات البريطانية من الهند بقصد إزاحة العثمانيين عن الخليج وحماية منشآت النفط في جنوب غرب إيران. حتى وصلت بغداد بعد جهود وخسائر كبيرة بعد أكثر من سنتين ونصف السنة، دافعت خلالها القوات العثمانية دفاعاً مستميتًا.
وفي يوم الأحد 11 آذار/ مارس 1917، سقطت بغداد بقيادة الجنرال البريطاني ستانلي مود، بعد سلسلة من الانتصارات في يد الجيش البريطاني خلال القتال مع الأتراك العثمانيين في الحرب العالمية الأولى، كما وقعت بغداد كمعظم مناطق العراق الأخرى تحت الانتداب البريطاني.
لم تمر إلا سنوات قليلة حتى انتشرت الروح الوطنية بين العراقيين للتحرر من السيطرة البريطانية بسبب قرار الحكومة البريطانية ربط العراق بالكومنولث البريطاني، وقرارها بتشكيل الإدارة المدنية في العراق، التي ترأسها السير أرنولد ويلسون حتى أيار 1918 فتبعه السير بيرسي كوكس الذي ألغى العديد من المؤسسات الإدارية العثمانية، وانشأ محلها مؤسسات عسكرية لإدارة الشؤون المدنية، ووضع على رأسها ضباطًا من رتب عالية، فحكموا بشكل صارم، وتصرفوا مع العراقيين بشكل مهين. فكان لتلك التصرفات ردود أفعال معاكسة من قبل العراقيين، مما أدى إلى انطلاق ثورة شعبية عام 1920 لتمتد في كل أجزاء العراق، سُميت بثورة العشرين، وقد استمرت ستة أشهر تقريباً.

التاريخ المعاصر
أصبحت بغداد عاصمة لمملكة العراق بعد عام 1921. وقد مُنح العراق الاستقلال رسميًا في عام 1932، وزاد استقلاله في عام 1946. ازداد عدد سكان المدينة من 145,000 المقدر في عام 1900 إلى 580,000 في عام 1950.
قام أعضاء في «المربع الذهبي» في 1 نيسان/ أبريل 1941، ورشيد عالي الكيلاني بانقلاب في بغداد. عمل رشيد علي تثبيت حكومة موالية للألمان وإيطاليا المؤيدتان لاستبدال حكومة عبد الإله بن علي الهاشمي الموالية لبريطانيا. في 31 أيار/ مايو، بعد الثورة وبعد فرار رشيد علي وحكومته، استسلم رئيس بلدية بغداد للقوات البريطانية والكومنولث. حدثت عقب الفوضى التي أعقبت سقوط حكومة رشيد عالي الكيلاني خلال انقلاب 1941 أعمال عنف ونهب نشبت في بغداد بالعراق واستهدفت سكان المدينة من اليهود في 1 حزيران/ يونيو 1941 خلال احتفالهم بعيد الشفوعوت اليهودي،  قبل أن تتمكن القوات البريطانية من السيطرة على المدينة. انتهت الحادثة في اليوم التالي لدى دخول البريطانيين بغداد وراح ضحيتها حوالي 175 قتيلا و 1،000 جريحا يهوديا، كما تم تدمير حوالي 900 منزلا تابعا لليهود.
تركت هذه الحادثة أثرا عميقا لدى اليهود العراقيين وساعدت على سرعة هجرتهم إلى فلسطين. فبحلول عام 1951 هاجر أكثر من 80% منهم من العراق.
في 14 تموز/ يوليو 1958، قام أفراد من الجيش العراقي بقيادة عبد الكريم قاسم بانقلاب للإطاحة بمملكة العراق. تم إعلان قيام الجمهورية العراقية وانتهاء حقبة العهد الملكي من خلال البيان الأول للحركة والذي أذاعه عبد السلام عارف من دار الإذاعة، وذلك بعد نجاحه في قلب نظام الحكم وقتل الملك فيصل الثاني، وقاموا بالسيطرة على القيادة العامة للجيش ودار الإذاعة ومجمع بدالة الهاتف المركزي، من خلال قطاعات اللواء العشرين الذي تحت إمرته.
في 17 تموز/ يوليو 1968، قام حزب البعث العربي الاشتراكي بالتحالف مع ضباط بعثيين بانقلاب على الرئيس عبد الرحمن عارف الذي استلم الحكم بعد وفاة أخيه عبد السلام عارف. وقد تم تعيين أحمد حسن البكر رئيسا لمجلس قيادة الثورة ورئيساً للجمهورية وقائدًا عامًا للجيش وأصبح صدام حسين نائب رئيس مجلس قيادة الثورة، كما أصبح نائب رئيس الجمهورية في عام 1972. يصف الكثير من العراقيين فترة البكر بالعصر الذهبي لبغداد، إذ قام العراق بتأميم النفط والقضاء على الأمٌية والبطالة.
استلم الرئيس صدام حسين الحكم في عام 1979. وسرعان ما أدخل البلاد في حرب مع إيران دامت ثماني سنوات ابتداءً من عام 1980. ولم تدم فترة السلم إلا عامين حتى غزى الكويت عام 1990، لتبدأ حرب الخليج الثانية على العراق بقيادة قوات التحالف. وقد تم تدمير الكثير من البنى التحتية للعاصمة بغداد من طرق وجسور وحتى محطات توليد الكهرباء. كما تم بعدها فرض حصار اقتصادي على العراق دام لمدة 13 عام حتى سقوط حكم حزب البعث في العراق عام 2003.

الاحتلال الأمريكي

شنّت الولايات المتحدة حربًا على العراق في عام 2003 بحجة وجود أسلحة للدمار الشامل. وبعد ثلاثة أسابيع من بداية الحملة، بدأت القوات الأمريكة تحركها نحو العاصمة بغداد. كان التوقع الأولي أن تقوم القوات المدرعة الأمريكية بحصار المدينة وتقوم بحرب شوارع في بغداد بإسناد من القوة الجوية الأمريكية، خاصة بعد المعارك التي حدثت مع القوات العراقية في الجنوب.
أعلنت القوات الأمريكية في 9 نيسان/ أبريل 2003 بسط سيطرتها على معظم المناطق بعد انهيار الدفاعات العراقية بشكل مفاجئ، ونقلت وكالات الأنباء مشاهد لحشد صغير يحاولون الإطاحة بتمثال للرئيس العراقي صدام حسين في وسط ساحة الفردوس، والتي قاموا بها بمساعدة من ناقلة دبابات أمريكية وقام المارينز بوضع العلم الأمريكي على وجه التمثال ليستبدلوه بعلم العراق فيما بعد، بعد أن أدركوا أن للأمر رموزًا ومعاني قد تثير المشاكل. وقد تولى القائد العسكري الأمريكي تومي فرانكس قيادة العراق في تلك الفترة باعتباره القائد العام للقوات الأمريكية.
تسبب هذا الغزو بأضرار كبيرة في بغداد شملت جميع القطاعات بما فيها النقل، الطاقة، البنية التحتية والصحة. ولا تزال المدينة تعاني من نتائج هذه الحرب إلى اليوم.
الوضع الحالي
بدأ انسحاب القوات الأمريكية من العراق في عام 2009، واستمر لعامين، حيث غادر آخر جندي أمريكي البلاد في 18 كانون الأول/ ديسمبر 2011. وقد أتى هذا الانسحاب بعد ضغوط داخلية وخارجية على الإدارة الأمريكية، حيث خسرت الولايات المتحدة خلال احتلالها للعراق 4474 قتيلاً و 33 ألف جريح حسب الأرقام الرسمية، كما أنفقت حوالي تريليون دولار. من جهة أخرى، عانى العراق من تبعات هذا الانسحاب سياسيًا وأمنيًا. وقد شهدت بغداد عددًا كبيرًا من التفجيرات التي تلت هذا الانسحاب، نتيجة الخروقات الأمنية.

التسمية
تجمع المصادر التاريخية أن الخليفة العباسي الثاني أبوجعفر المنصور قد قرر بناء عاصمة له تليق بمكانة الدولة الإسلامية المتصاعدة، فاختار بعد تدقيق وتمحيص موقعًا على نهر الصرا بين نهري دجلة والفرات، حيث كانت تقوم قرية تسمى بغداد. كان يجتمع فيها تجار البلاد في رأس كل شهر. وتجمع المصادر على أن اسم القرية الأصلية في ذلك الموقع هو (بغداذ) و (بغدان) أو تبدل الباء ميمًا فيصير الاسم (مغداد) أو (مغدان). وهذه الأسماء كلها ممنوعة من الصرف ولكنها تقبل التذكير والتأنيث، فتقول (هذا بغداد) و (هذه بغداد). ويشتق منها الفعل «تبغدد» أو «تبغدن» بمعنى سكن بغداد أو تشبه بأهلها.
وسماها بانيها أبوجعفر المنصور (مدينة السلام) وهو الاسم الرسمي الذي ظهر في وثائق الدواوين العباسية وعلى النقود والأوزان. كما أطلقت على المدينة أسماء أخرى مثل (دار السلام) و (مدينة المنصور) و (مدينة الخلفاء) و (المدينة المدورة) و (عاصمة الرشيد) و (الزوراء). ولكن الاسم القديم (بغداد) هو الذي ظل عالقًا في أذهان الناس ويتردد على ألسنتهم، فأحتفظت المدينة بذلك الاسم حتى يومنا هذا.
المعنى الفارسي لاسم مدينة بغداد
كانت اللغة الفارسية هي اللغة الرسمية والمعتمدة في العراق منذ سقوط الدولة البابلية عام 539 ق.م إلى مجيئ الفتح الإسلامي باستثناء فترات قصيرة خضع فيها العراق لاحتلال الأغريق ثم الرومان. وكانت قرية بغداد الأصلية قائمة أثناء الحكم الساساني للعراق. وهكذا جاء أقدم المؤرخين الذين تطرقوا إلى اسم مدينة بغداد مثل المقدسي وابن رستة بتفسيرات مستمدة من اللغة الفارسية لاسم بغداد. وقد ترددت تلك التفسيرات في كتب المؤرخين اللاحقين. وأكثر هذه التفسيرات شيوعا هو القائل إن (باغ) تعني بستان بالفارسية و (داد) تعني عطية، فيكون معنى الاسم (البستان العطية)، أو (باغ) اسم صنم أو شيطان و (داد) عطية أو هبة فيكون المعنى (عطية الصنم). وقد قرب بعض المعاصرين المعنى فقال أنها تعني (هبة الله). فلا غرابة في أن البكري (ت 487 هجري) قد ضمن اسم بغداد في مصنفه المعروف باسم معجم ما استعجم لأنه عد الاسم أعجميا وأردفه بمعناه العربي.
المعنى السومري والأكدي لاسم مدينة بغداد
كشفت الحفريات الآثارية في موقع بغداد عن واجهة كبيرة مبنية بالآجر البابلي وعليها اسم الملك البابلي الشهير نبوخذنصر (605 - 562 ق.م) وألقابه. من ناحية أخرى، وجدت وثائق بابلية تحمل اسم بلدة (بغداد) تعود إحداها، وهي وثيقة قضائية إلى أيام الملك البابلي حمورابي (1792 - 1750 ق.م) صاحب مسلة القوانين البابلية الشهيرة.وهكذا فإن اسم (بغداد) كان قد اُستعمل قبل ألف عام على الأقل من دخول كلمة (باغ) بمعنى الصنم أو الإله_الرب إلى اللغة الآرامية وعند العودة إلى المعجم الذي أصدره الدكتور بهاءالدين الوردي للغة السومرية، نجد أن بغداد تعني (قلعة قبيلة الصقر) أو (هيكل الصقر)  وهذا مايؤيده عالم الآشوريات الفرنسي لابات في معجمه الخاص بالعلامات الأكدية.
أسماء بغداد الأخرى
لقد اختلف مؤرخو مدينة بغداد حتى في معنى إسمها العربي الواضح (مدينة السلام). فرأى بعضهم أن المقصود بالسلام هو الله. ويرى بعضهم أن المنصور أسماها مدينة السلام، لأن نهر دجلة يقال له (وادي السلام). ويرى بعضهم الآخر أن المنصور أسماها (مدينة السلام) تفاؤلا في انها ستكون آمنة مطمئنة. فالسلام شرط أساسي لازدهار المدن ورفاهيتها.
أما مدينة المنصور ومدينة الخلفاء والمدينة المدورة والزوراء فهي أوصاف لبغداد إستخدمها الخاصة والعامة في نعت المدينة. فتسمية (مدينة المنصور) هي تعريف للمدينة بإضافتها إلى بانيها ، وكذلك (مدينة الخلفاء) تعريفٌ لها بإضافتها إلى ساكنيها بعد تعاقب عدد من الخلفاء العباسيين على الإقامة فيها. و (المدينة المدورة) نعت للمدينة يميزها عن غيرها من المدن، ظنًا من الناعتين بأنها المدينة الوحيدة التي بنيت على شكل دائرة. و (الزوراء) نعت كذلك، اُطلق عليها لأن الأبواب الداخلية لأسوارها مزورة عن الأبواب الخارجية، أي ليست على سمتها كما يقول ياقوت الحموي. ويستخدم ترتيب مداخل أبواب السور على هذا الشكل المنحني أو المنكسر لأغراض دفاعية. ومن المحتمل أن هذه الطريقة قد أستخدمت أول مرة في بغداد  كما اورد الحميري (ت 900 هجرية) في كتابه (الروض المعطار في خبر الأقطار) حين قال: وكان بعضهم يسميها (الصيادة) لأنها تصيد القلوب.

الجغرافيا
تقع بغداد على خط عرض 33 وخط طول 44 على نهر دجلة، في المنطقة الوسطية للعراق، حيث تقع ما بين المدن الرئيسية شمالاً وجنوبًا، فتبعد عنها البصرة 445 كم إلى الجنوب، بينما تقع شمالاً كل من الموصل على بعد 350 كم وأربيل على بعد 320 كم.
أما عن مدن الجوار، فيقع إلى الغرب كل من دمشق على بعد 750 كم، عمّان على بعد 800 كم، بيروت على بعد 830 كم، القدس على بعد 875 كم والقاهرة على بعد 1290 كم. وتقع جنوبا كل من الكويت على بعد 545 كم والرياض على بعد 980 كم. أما من الشرق فتقع طهران على بعد 700 كم، وإلى الشمال الغربي تقع أنقرة على بعد 1250 كم.

الموقع والطبوغرافيا
تقع مدينة بغداد على بعد 85 كم شمال موقع مدينة بابل الأثرية، وعلى بعد بضعة كيلومترات شمال غرب مدينة قطسيفون (المدائن) والتي استمرت كمركز رئيسي للبلاد حتى حلت محلها بغداد في أوائل العصر العباسي. في 30 تموز 762 كلٌف الخليفة المنصور ببناء المدينة، وكان البناء تحت إشراف البرامكة. اعتقد المنصور أن بغداد ستكون المدينة المثالية لتكون عاصمة للإمبراطورية الإسلامية تحت حكم العباسيين. اختار أبو جعفر بنفسه رقعة مرتفعة من الأرض، على الجانب الغربي من دجلة عند مصب نهر الرفيل فيه، وقرر أن يشيّد عاصمته الجديدة على هذه الرقعة.

تُعد بغداد أكبر مدن العراق وأيضًا من كبريات مدن الشرق الأوسط وثاني أكبر مدينة عربية معاصرة بعد القاهرة في مصر. ومدينة بغداد من المدن التي ترتبط بتاريخ الخلافة العباسية إن لم يكن تاريخ العالم الإسلامي خلال القرون الخمسة من عام 150 هـ/767م إلى 656 هـ/1258م، فكان أبو جعفر المنصور ثاني خليفة عباسي وأول من اتخذ بغداد عاصمة له بعدما قضى على منافسيه من العباسيين والعلويين في عام 145 هـ 762م، وبنى أبو جعفر المنصور على نهر دجلة عاصمته بغداد في عام (145 - 149 هـ) 710 ميلادية على شكل دائري، وهو اتجاه جديد في بناء المدن الإسلامية، لأن مـعظم المدن الإسلامية، كانت إما مستطيلة كالفسطاط، أو مربعة كالقاهرة، أو بيضاوية كصنعاء. ولعل السبب في ذلك يرجع إلى أن هذه المدن نشأت بجوار مرتفعات حالت دون استدارتها. ويُعتبر تخطيط المدينة المدورة (بغداد)، ظاهرة جديدة في الفن المعماري الإسلامي ولا سيما في المدن الأخرى التي شيّدها العباسيون مثل مدينة سامراء وما حَوته من مساجد وقصور خلافية فخمة. وإلى جانب العمارة وجدت الزخرفة التي وصفت بأنهما لغة الفن الإسلامي، وتقوم على زخرفة المساجد والقصور والقباب بأشكال هندسية أو نباتية جميلة تبعث في النفس الراحة والهدوء والانشراح. وسُمي هذا الفن الزخرفي الإسلامي في أوروبا باسم أرابسك.

تمثل بغداد حاليًا حالة من حالات التتابع المدني في إطار موقع واحد ففي إطار موقع الرافدين تتابعت العواصم من بابل القديمة إلى سلوقية الإغريقية وقطيسنون الفارسية التي كانت تعرف بمدائن كسرى ثم بغداد العربية الحالية. لا تزال نواة بغداد القديمة موجودة حتى الآن تنتشر حولها الأجزاء الحديثة حول البوابات الشمالية والجنوبية القديمة على الجانب الغربي لنهر دجلة على بعد 540 كم تقريبًا إلى الشمال الغربي من الخليج العربي.
وتكمن أهمية موقع بغداد في توافر المياه وتناقص أخطار الفيضانات مما أدّى بدوره إلى اتساع رقعة المدينة وزيادة نفوذها إلى جانب سهولة اتصالها عبر دجلة بواسطة الجسور التي تربطها بالجانب الأيسر من النهر .

اتجاه القبلة
اتجاه القِبلة: 160° درجة من الشمال إلى الغرب (جنوب الغرب).
المسافة ما بين مكة وبغداد: 1399 كم

مناطق بغداد
ينقسم مركز العاصمة إلى صوبَيْن (جانبين) هما الكرخ على الجانب الغربي لنهر دجلة، والرصافة على الجانب الشرقي للنهر وفي كلا الجزئين نجد المباني الحديثة وعلى جانب الرصافة توجد منطقة الكرادة ذات الشوارع الضيقة والمحلات الكثيرة ويقصدها معظم سكان بغداد للتبضع، إنّ بعض أسماء مناطق بغداد هي قديمة من تراث بغداد كسبع أبكار، وقد ذُكر تفسير معانيها في كتب وبعض أسماءها حديثة كحي الخضراء، وفي عام 1908م اتخذت الحكومة العثمانية أسماءً جديدةً لمحلات بغداد وشوارعها. وفي تشرين الأول عام 2000، أُعلنَ في بغداد عن مبادرة حكومية لتغيير بعض أسماء مناطق بغداد وشوارعها تنفيذاً لمقاصد «حملة الانسجام بين المكان والحاضر والماضي»، ومن ذلك تغييرُ شارع كورنيش الأعظمية من اسم شارع بيرم التونسي إلى شارع امرؤ القيس إذ رأت لجنة الأسماء أن شارع الكورنيش يتوافق مع الرومانسية المعهودة من امرؤ القيس، وذكر مسؤول اللجنة أن الأسماء «بعضها لا ينسجم مع الذوق العام لأنها استمدت أسمائها من حادث أو شخصية»، وبيّنَ أن مقياس الاختيار ليس بشهرة الاسم في مكانه بل يُنتقى «من التاريخ العربي والعراقي القديم والمعاصر»، وقال إن بعض المناطق لم تكن لها أسماء فاختاروا لها تسمية، وأقرّ بوجود أسماء رسمية لا يعرفها الناس بسبب تجاهل الدوائر الحكومية لاستعمال تلك الأسماء. وفي 1 حزيران عام 2017 أعلنَ مجلس محافظة بغداد عن تغيير اسم شارع ابن تيمية في جنوب الوزيرية إلى شارع الشافعي. الجدول التالي يبين ببعض مناطق بغداد الرئيسية:

المناطق الصناعية في بغداد
تمتد المناطق الصناعية من مركز بغداد إلى خارجها وضواحيها مثل الحي الصناعي في البياع، ومنطقة التاجي الصناعية شمال المدينة.

المناخ
يُعتبر مناخ بغداد مناخ صحراوي، حيث يتميز الصيف في العراق بارتفاع درجات الحرارة. وقد لازم ارتفاع درجات الحرارة في بغداد خلال السنوات الأخيرة ظاهرة هبوب العواصف الترابية الخفيفة. ويعلل الخبراء شدة هذه الظواهر في صيف بغداد بعد الغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003، إلى الإحتباس الذي يعانيه الجو في البلاد وازدياد نسبة الكربون في الجو نتيجة عوادم المولدات الكهربائية، وازدياد ظاهرة التصحر، وانجراف التربة، والجفاف، وتغيير البيئة العراقية ككل نتيجة الإهمال المتعمد وعدم وضع الحلول العاجلة.
وتوجد في محافظة بغداد محطة رصد جوي واقعة في مطار بغداد الدولي، تأسست منذ تأسيس المطار. وتعمل على الرصد السطحي وذلك بنقل الحالة السائدة على أرض المطار كل ساعة إلى قسم التنبؤ الجوي وقسم الرقابة الجوية في المطار.

السكان
تُعتبر بغداد في الوقت الحاضر أكبر مدن العراق، حيث يسكن محافظة بغداد قرابة 7.2 مليون نسمة. فيما بلغ عدد سكان المحافظة عام 2009 قرابة 6.7 مليون نسمة. كما تُعتبر ثاني كبريات العواصم العربية من حيث حجمها السكاني. ويتكون معظم سكان مدينة بغداد من العرب المسلمين والأكراد الفيليين وأقليات من المسيحيين والصابئة واليزيديين، فيما كان اليهود قبل عام 1948م، يشكلون نسبة كبيرة من السكان وكانوا أكبر طائفة غير مسلمة لكن عددهم تناقص بشكل حاد بعد إعلان نشوء دولة إسرائيل على أرض فلسطين وهجرتهم الجماعية نهاية الأربعينيات وبداية الخمسينيات.
لقد قفزت نسبة سكان بغداد إلى مجموع سكان عموم العراق بشكل كبير جداً في خلال بضعة عقود من الزمن. كما انعكست تلك الزيادة الكبيرة في عدد السكان في اكتظاظ سكاني خانق في العديد من مناطق بغداد السكنية وعلى الخصوص في مركز مدينة بغداد. وقد تجاوزت الكثافة السكانية لمدينة الثورة (مدينة الصدر) أعلى معدلات الكثافة السكانية المسجلة في المنطقة. تزامنت تلك الظاهرة السريعة مع فترة اضطرابات غير مسبوقة في تاريخ العراق الحديث، فقد تفجرت أزمة سكن حادة في بغداد، وبدأت تظهر اختناقات مرورية، وعجز واسع النطاق في الخدمات الأساسية لحياة المواطنين البغداديين كالنقص في تجهيز مياه الشرب والنقص في تجهيزات الطاقة وخدمات الاتصالات.
الجدول الآتي يظهر عدد سكان مدينة بغداد التقريبي من عام 1800 وحتى 2010:

الاقتصاد
من الناحية الاقتصادية، تُعد بغداد مركزًا للعديد من المصانع والورش، والمركز الرئيسي للصناعة في العراق كما تعد مركزًا تجاريًّا رئيسيًّا وحلقة وصل بين تركيا وسوريا والهند وجنوب شرق آسيا والسوق التجاري الرئيسي في الدولة وأيضًا تعد مركزاً سياحياً هاماً يزوره أكثر من مليون سائح في السنة قبل الحصار حيث كان المطار الدولي يعمل وتُعد أيضًا بغداد من المناطق الزراعية حيث إن كثيرا من توابعها يعتمد على زراعة كثير من الغلات.

الصناعة
يُعد كل من السجاد والجلود والمنسوجات ومنتجات الإسمنت والتبغ، أهم المنتجات في بغداد. كما يُعتبر إنتاج وتكرير النفط أيضًا أحد أهم الأنشطة الاقتصادية في المدينة. حيث ثبت أن حقل نفط شرق بغداد يحمل أحد أكبر الاحتياطيات في العراق (18 بليون برميل). وتُعتبر مصفاة الدورة التي تقع على مشارف المدينة هي ثالث أكبر مصفاة في العراق من حيث القدرة على الإنتاج (100,000 برميل باليوم الواحد). يُشار بالذكر إلى أن بغداد تحتضن سنويًّا معرضًا عالميًا لمختلف الصناعات حول العالم، هو معرض بغداد الدولي.

الزراعة
تنتشر في المدينة بساتين النخيل، وتتركز بكثافة على ضفاف نهر دجلة. وتُعتبر الوثائق العثمانية وخصوصا سندات الطابو واحدة من أهم المصادر التاريخية التي توثق ذلك، لما لها من أهمية بعد إصدار الدولة العثمانية لقانون الأراضي عام 1859. حيث تشير هذه الوثائق إلى أن بساتين النخيل كانت تاريخيا موجودة على ضفتي نهر دجلة، بالإضافة لوجود بساتين أخرى تحوي أشجار مثمرة كالحمضيات، كما تنتج هذه الأراضي محاصيلا وفيرة.

التجارة
كان من نتيجة وقوع بغداد تاريخيًا على مسار طريق الحرير العالمي، وفي وسط العراق حديثًا، أن أصبح موقعها يتحكم بالاقتصاد الوطني بشكل كبير. ولقد لعبت الأسواق التجارية في المدينة منذ القدم دورا مهما محوريا في الحركة التجارية والاقتصادية. وتشهد أسواق المدينة نشاطا كبيرًا على مدار العام وتعرض فيها سلع ومنتجات محلية أو مستوردة من مناشئ مختلفة.
وتختلف هذه الأسواق من حيث التراث والحداثة أو حسب نوعية السلع التي تتعامل فيها، فمنها ما يُعتبر من الأسواق التراثية، كسوق الصفافير وسوق السراي، وسوق الساعاتية، وسوق الاسترابادي، وسوق المستنصر، وسوق دانيال، ومنها ما هو أسواق للجملة، ويتركز هذا النوع في سوقين رئيسيين هما سوق جميلة، وسوق الشورجة. بالإضافة إلى الخانات القديمة. كما تحوي المدينة على الكثير من الأسواق الجديدة كالسوق العربي، وسوق الأرمن، وسوق الكنيسة، والسوق العباسي. هذا بالإضافة إلى المجمعات التجارية الحديثة، حيث ظهرت في السبعينيات والثمانينات من القرن العشرين الأسواق المركزية في عدد من المناطق البغدادية. أما اليوم فيوجد عدد من مراكز التسوق الكبيرة نسبيًا في بعض الأماكن التجارية من العاصمة.

بغداد الرسمية
تحوي المدينة على مراكز الحكم الرئيسية في البلاد، بالإضافة إلى الوزارت والسفارات الأجنبية ومقرات المنظمات الدولية العاملة في العراق. كما توجد في بغداد أهم القصور الرئاسية التي يعود تاريخها إلى فترات مختلفة، منها القصر الجمهوري، وقصر الفاو، قصر الرحاب، قصر الزهور، وقصر السلام. وتُعد منطقة كرادة مريم (المنطقة الخضراء بعد 2003) أهم المناطق التي تقع فيها هذه المؤسسات الإدارية.

أمانة بغداد
يعود تاريخ تأسيس أمانة بغداد إلى زمن الدولة العثمانية في عهد الوالي مدحت باشا عام 1868، حيث كانت بمستوى بلدية. وجاءت تسمية أمانة العاصمة وتسمية رئيسها بـ «أمين العاصمة» بعد صدور قانون إدارة البلدية عام 1931. وبموجبه تم إلغاء قانون البلديات العثماني السابق وجميع الأنظمة والتعليمات الصادرة بموجبه. لقد كان ارتباط أمانة العاصمة بوزارة الداخلية حتى قيام ثورة 14 تموز عام 1958. في عام 1987، تم تغيير تسمية «أمانة العاصمة» إلى «أمانة بغداد»، كذلك تم إلغاء محافظة بغداد وجعلها مدينة بغداد بعد أن تم تعديل ارتباط الوحدات الإدارية التابعة لها ووضعت حدود جديدة لمدينة بغداد وأُعيد ارتباط الأمانة بمجلس الوزراء وهو الحال القائم حاليًا. إلا أن إعادة المحافظة قد تم في وقت لاحق.

البنية التحتية
تتكون بغداد من شبكة من الخطوط السريعة والطرق الرئيسية والثانوية تغطي جميع أنحاء المدينة. وترتبط بمطار بغداد الدولي عبر طريق سريع يمتد إلى الجهة الغربية منها. كما ترتبط بمدن العراق الأخرى وبمدن الجوار عبر عدد من الطرق السريعة، أهمها طريق المرور السريع 1 الذي يربط عدد من الدول العربية مرورًا ببغداد، فضلاً عن الطريق الاستراتيجي الممتد من مدينة زاخو في الشمال إلى محافظة البصرة مروراً ببغداد. وتُعد الطرق التالية من أهم وأشهر الشوارع الرئيسية الداخلية في المدينة: 14 رمضان، وأبو نؤاس، والمتنبي، والمغرب، والأميرات، والرشيد، والفضل، والنضال، وحيفا، وعمر بن عبد العزيز، وفلسطين، وغيرها. كما يمر بالمدينة عدد من السكك الحديدية التي تربط شمال العراق بجنوبه، فهناك خط سكك حديد بغداد – الموصل، وخط سكك حديد بغداد – البصرة.
وقد تأثرت البنية التحتية في بغداد أسوةً بباقي مدن وقرى العراق، بشكل كبير نتيجة للحروب التي خاضتها البلاد في العقود الأخيرة، والحصار الإقتصادي الذي فُرض عليه لمدة 13 عام. ثم تلى ذلك الغزو الأمريكي للعراق في عام 2003، والإدارة السيئة للموارد بعده، واللذان أثرا سلبا بشكل كبير على ما تبقى من بنية تحتية.

النقل والمواصلات
ازداد الازدحام في مدينة بغداد، ولا سيما بعد الاحتلال الأمريكي سنة 2003، حين تكاثر استيراد السيارات، قال عضو مجلس النواب، جاسمُ البخاتي، في يوم 16 آذار سنة 2021 «إن طرق بغداد مصممة لاستيعاب 700 ألف سيارة، بينما يتجول فيها الآن ما بين 2.5 و 3 ملايين سيارة»، تُعتبر الحافلات والمركبات الصغيرة الوسائل الرئيسية للتنقل داخل مدينة بغداد. ويوجد من هذه الحافلات ما هو عام تابع للمنشأة العامة للنقل، ومنها ماهو خاص. أما بالنسبة للمركبات فتُستخدم سيارات الأجرة والسيارات الخاصة.
كما يُعد النقل النهري عبر نهر دجلة من الوسائل الشائعة أيضًا لدى البغداديين، حيث تختصر القوارب الكثير من الوقت والمسافات، خاصة بعد الوضع الأمني السيئ الذي تلى الغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003، والذي نتج عنه إغلاق عدد كبير من الطرق والجسور الرئيسية في المدينة، ووضع نقاط تفتيش وجدارن كونكريتية حالت دون وصول المواطنين إلى العديد من الأماكن عبر المركبات بصورة طبيعية، وأدت إلى اختناقات مرورية كبيرة. ويُسمح لهذه القوارب التنقل بين عدد قليل من جسور بغداد البالغ عددها 13 جسرًا.
وكان من المفترض إنشاء مشروع مترو في المدينة منذ عدة عقود، كما كانت هناك خطط لبناء هذا النظام. وقد بُنيَ فعلا جزء من الأنفاق، ولكنها أستخدمت لأغراض عسكرية. بدأت الحكومة العراقية في تشرين الثاني / نوفمبر 2008 بدراسات الجدوى لبناء خطين تحت الأرض في كل من بغداد والنجف جنوب البلاد، إلا أن المشروع لم يرَ النور إلى الآن.

سكك الحديد

شهد العراق أول خط حديدي لعربات الترام عام 1869، عندما أسس الوالي العثماني مدحت باشا شركة ترامواي بغداد - الكاظمية، حيث استخدمت الخيول لجر العربات، وكان يعرف لدى العراقيون ب «الكاري». وقد تشكلت أول إدارة للسكك الحديد في العراق في عام 1916، وكانت آنذاك تحت سيطرة الجيش البريطاني. ثم انتقلت إلى إدارة مدنية بريطانية عام 1920، ثم تحولت إلى إدارة مدنية عراقية في 1936. وقد تم تسيير أول رحلة من بغداد إلى سميكة الدجيل الواقعة إلى الجنوب من مدينة سامراء عام 1914.
تقوم الشركة العامة لسكك الحديد حاليا بتسيير رحلات للقطار بين بغداد والبصرة، حيث سُير أول قطار بينهما عام 1920. في حين أنه قد تم تسيير أول قطار بين بغداد وكركوك عام 1925، وأول قطار بين بغداد والموصل عام 1940، وأول قطار من العراق إلى محطة حيدر باشا في إسطنبول في 15 تموز عام 1940. وقد تم تشغيل أول قطار على الخط القياسي في العراق بين بغداد والبصرة عام 1967.
تضرر قطاع سكك الحديد في العراق بفعل الغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003 وما أعقبه من عمليات نهب، حيث لم يعد صالحًا للاستخدام من القاطرات سوى عدد قليل. كما أن الوضع الأمني غير المستقر أدى إلى توقف الرحلات بشكل نهائي في فترات معينة.

العمارة والتخطيط الحضري
تميز النمط المعماري البغدادي بتناغم متناسق بين الناحية الوظيفية والناحية الجمالية. وقد راعى المعمار العراقي عند تشييد الدار البغدادي الظروف المناخية وأحياءها ومحلاتها، وجعل النوافذ المطلة على الخارج قليلة الفتحات ومقاربة لنوافذ الجانب الآخر من الدور، وجعل الفسحات المكشوفة متجهة لوسط الدار ليوفر بذلك جوًا مظللاً منورًا قد الإمكان مراعيًا الظروف الاجتماعية السائدة حينذاك. وقد أكثر المعمار البغدادي من استخدام الخشب للحد من تقلبات درجة الحرارة في داخل الدار.
كان الطابوق ولا يزال يُعتبر المادة الأساسية في بناء العمارة البغدادية لعدم توفر الحجر كما في بلاد الشام، كما استخدام الآجر في صياغة أنواع من العقود المستديرة والمدببة والتي كونت مع الطابوق مقرنصات جمعت بين الوظيفة الانشائية وجمالية التشكيل. أما الأسقف التي اُقيمت على الأعمدة فكانت مادتها الاساسية الخشب.
من الجدير بالذكر أن بغداد شهدت في نهاية العشرينات من القرن العشرين نمطًا انتقاليًا بين النمط البغدادي القديم والنمط الذي ساد فيما بعد، والمتمثل بتشييد «محلة السنك»، والتي استخدم في تشييدها نمط جديد تمثل في استخدام حديد الشيلمان في تسقيف الدور والمحلات العامة والخانات للأغراض التجارية، كما ظهرت سينما الرشيد والحمراء وعلاء الدين.
تمتاز أزقة بغداد وأماكنها السكنية القديمة كشارع الرشيد بعناصر معمارية مميزة، أهمها الشناشيل (المشربيات)، التي كانت أبرز معالمها. وتكتسب الشناشيل، أو النوافذ الخشبية المحفورة أو المزخرفة، أهمية اجتماعية لدى البغداديين، من حيث ضمان الخصوصية في المنزل، فضلاً عن تخفيفها حدة أشعة الشمس وتلطيف الهواء، كما أن بعضها مغطى بالزجاج إتقاءاً لبرودة الشتاء. كما تنتشر البيوت التراثية القديمة على مساحة وسعة من العاصمة، كما في شارع الكفاح وشارع الشيخ عمر والخلفاء والبتاويين والكاظمية والأعظمية والشواكة والكريمات.

عمارة الحداثة
مرّت مدينة بغداد بتغيرات وتطورت مختلفة، أثرت على طابعها العمراني بشكل ملحوظ. وغير ذلك من نسيجها الحضري. وكان من أبرز التغيرات في عمارتها تلك الفترة التي تميزت ببزوغ وانتشار عمارة الحداثة. فهي تمثل القترة بين الأربعينيات والسبعينيات من القرن العشرين والتي كان لها أسبابها العديدة وعواملها المختلفة التي مهدت لانتشار عمارة الحداثة. وقد تأسس في بغداد عام 1950 مجلس الإعمار العراقي، الذي نفذ وخطط للعديد من المشاريع الحيوية التي ما زالت قائمة وفعالة إلى اليوم.
شهدت حقبة الخمسينات وما بعدها نموًا واسعًا لفكر الحداثة في المجال المعماري. وقد برزت أسماء بغدادية كبيرة في فن العمارة والنحت مثل رفعت الجادرجي، محمد صالح مكية، جواد سليم، خالد الرحال، محمد غني حكمت، زها حديد، وغيرهم. كما تمّت دعوة معماريين عالميين كبار لتصميم أبنية في بغداد، ومن هؤلاء المعماريين جيو بونتي وفرانك لويد رايت وألفار ألتو ووليم دودوك، ووالتر غروبيوس الذي صمّم ابنية جامعة بغداد، بالإضافة إلى فيرني مارج الذي صمّم المتحف العراقي الوطني، والذي جمع في تصميمه ثقافة بلاد الرافدين مع بناء حديث. غير أن العديد من هذه المشاريع تأجل تنفيذها لعقود أو أنها لم تُنفذ بتاتًا، كما هو الحال مع مشروع المدينة الأولمبية الذي دعي لتصميمه المعماري لي كوربوزيه في العام 1956. ومن هذه المدينة لم يتم تنفيذ سوى قاعة الألعاب الرياضية خلال الثمانينات وذلك بإشراف إحدى المؤسسات الفرنسية وبتطابق تام مع التصميم الأصلي.

النسيج الحضري
شهدت مدينة بغداد مراحل متعددة في نموها وتطورها كانت استجابة للمتغيرات العمرانية والتخطيطية والاقتصادية والاجتماعية والسياسية، مما انعكس على نسيجها واستعمالات الأرض فيها. وقد اتسمت بغداد في عشرينيات القرن العشرين بالنسيج المتضام العفوي والتدرج الهرمي للشوارع والأزقة التي تنتهي بطرق غير نافذة، وكانت استعمالات الأرض متداخلة فيما بينها، وكان الطابع السكني هو الغالب على المدينة مع وجود المناطق التجارية في المركز. وقد تحولت المدينة في الفترة الممتدة من الثلاثينات وحتى نهاية الخمسينيات من النمو شبه الدائري إلى الامتداد الطولي على محور نهر دجلة، كما بدأ النظام الشبكي للشوارع بالظهور.
لقد وصلت مدينة بغداد إلى مرحلة النضج العمراني والتخطيطي في الفترة الممتدة من الستينات وحتى أواخر السبعينات. وتوسعت المدينة بنمطين، الأول طولي على امتداد الطرق لرئيسية، والثاني حول نوى وظيفية ومعمارية كالأسواق والجوامع أو تقاطعات الطرق.
لقد تم وضع أول مخطط هيكلي لمدينة بغداد في عام 1956، وهو «مخطط مينوبريو، سبنسمي وماكفارليف» من المملكة المتحدة، حيث يتألف من شبكة للطرق الرئسية ومبان عامة جديدة وتصاميم معمارية للمراكز الحكومية مع تخصيص منطقة صناعية جنوب بغداد. ولكن المخطط لم يُنفذ، حيث لم يتثمر نهر دجلة، ولم تدرس فيه بدقة واقع المجتمع البغدادي وأهمية الحفاظ على تراثه. لذا تم العمل على مخطط آخر هو «مخطط دوكسيادس» من اليونان في عام 1959. حيث كان مستطيلا مكون من شبكة تخطيطية.
ومع حلول السبعينيات، ظهرت فكرة تطوير «منطقة بغداد الكبرى»، وذلك عندما أوصى التصميم الإنمائي الشامل لعام 1973 بأن يتم إعداد تصميم العاصمة الأساسي في إطار خطة التنمية القومية، وإن فائض عدد سكان العاصمة على قابلية الإستيعاب المقررة المتأتي من الهجرة ومن الزيادة الطبيعية لنمو السكان يتوجب توطينهم في منطقة بغداد الكبرى التي حددها التصميم الانمائى الشامل بدائرة نصف قطرها يتراوح ما بين 50 - 55 كم من مركز بغداد، وهذه الدائرة أيضًا تحاط بمنطقه دائرة الإقليم المركزي ذو نصف القطر البالغ بما بمقداره من 100 - 120 كم من مركز العاصمة.

دور العبادة
ينتشر في مدينة بغداد الآف المساجد والحسينيات للمذاهب الإسلامية المختلفة، كثير منها تم تصميمه على عمارة إسلامية. وتحوي المدينة على الكثير من المساجد الأثرية من العهد العباسي وحتى العثماني مثل جامع الخلفاء من عام 908، وجامع مرجان من عام 1356، وجامع سيد سلطان علي من عام 1589، جامع حسين باشا من عام 1674، وجامع العادلية من عام 1749، وجامع الحيدرخانة من عام 1819، وجامع الأزبك من عام 1879، وجامع الشيخ معروف الكرخي من عام 1892. كما يوجد في المدينة عدد من المساجد الكبرى والمراقد التي لها أهمية تاريخية، مثل مسجد الإمام الأعظم (مرقد الإمام أبو حنيفة النعمان) المؤسس عام 985، ومسجد الحضرة الكاظمية (مرقد الإمام موسى الكاظم) المؤسس عام 947. وجامع الشيخ عبد القادر الكيلاني في الحضرة القادرية منذ عام 1534م.
لقد ازدادت مساجد المدينة بشكل ملحوظ بعد الغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003. وكانت من بين مظاهر الفوضى التي خلفتها الحرب، الانتشار العشوائي للجوامع والمساجد التي بنيت بالتجاوز على أراض مملوكة للغير أو حوٌلت مبان حكومية متروكة إلى مساجد دون الحصول على الموافقات الرسمية اللازمة.
تنتشر في المدينة عشرات الكنائس للطوائف المسيحية المختلفة في مختلف أنحائها، حيث تواجدت الطائفة المسيحية في بغداد منذ انشائها في العصر العباسي. بل يُرجع بعض المؤرخون تواجد المسيحية في موقع مدينة بغداد الحالي إلى ما قبل إنشاء مدينة بغداد على يد الخليفة أبو جعفر المنصور، حيث أشار بعض المؤرخون إلى وجود أديرة مسيحية قديمة في أطراف موقع بغداد الحالي. وتضم بغداد على أكبر تجمع مسيحي في العراق، ويتألف المسيحيون في بغداد من عدة طوائف غالبيتهم من الكلدان والسريان الكاثوليك لكن يوجد تجمع كبير للكنائس الآشورية المشرقية والسريانية الأرثوذكسية مع تواجد أكبر تجمع بروتستانتي في العراق في بغداد.
تضم بغداد بالإضافة لعدد من دور العبادة التابعة للصابئة المندائيين. ويوجد في المدينة أيضًا كنيس يهودي في منطقة البتاوين، لكنه مهجور بسبب تهجير يهود العراق إلى فلسطين في نهاية الأربعينيات وبداية الخمسينيات من القرن العشرين. يُشار بالذكر إلى أن أعمال العنف الذي شهدته البلاد وهجرة المسيحيين بكثرة مؤخرًا، أديّا إلى إغلاق كثير من الكنائس في بغداد.

معالم بغداد
التعليم والتعليم العالي
تأسست في بغداد منذ إنشائها في القرن الثامن، عدة مدارس تاريخية كان لها دور كبير في الحضارة الإسلامية، منها المدرسة المأمونية، المدرسة المستنصرية، المدرسة الموفقية، المدرسة النظامية، ومدرسة محمد امين السويدي. وتُعتبر بغداد تاريخيّا، المركز التعليمي الرئيس في العراق. كما كانت الحكومة العراقية في الفترة المعاصرة هي المسؤولة عن هذا القطاع لفترة طويلة.

لقد عانى قطاع التعليم والتعليم العالي في بغداد ابتداءً من حرب الخليج الأولى (1980 - 1988)، وحتى الغزو الأمريكي للعراق في عام 2003، الذي استمرت تبعاته إلى اليوم، حيث تعرضت الكثير من المنشآت التعليمية للقصف أو التفجيرات طيلة العقود القليلة الماضية. وقد تدهور التعليم في العراق بشكل عام في الفترة الأخيرة، مما أدى لظهور التعليم الخاص بموازاة التعليم الحكومي، بالإضافة لزيادة كبيرة في نسبة الأمية نتيجة للتهرب من المدارس.
التعليم الأساسي والإعدادي
شهدت الفترة المتأخرة من العهد العثماني في بغداد نهضة تعليمية. فقد أنشأ الوالي مدحت باشا أول مدارس بغداد المعاصرة، وهي المدرسة الرشدية العسكرية سنة 1869، التي تخرج منها ضباطا عراقيين بعد دراسة 4 سنوات. كما تأسست أول مدارس المدينة الإعدادية عام 1888، وهي الإعدادية المركزية، وكانت الثانوية الوحيدة في المدينة. وتُعد أول مؤسسة علمية وثقافية معاصرة في بغداد وارتبط اسمها بتأريخ المدينة وذاكرتها الثقافية. أما في عام 1889، فقد تم تأسيس أول مدرسة ابتدائية حكومية في المدينة أيام الوالي سري باشا، وقد تبرع ببنائها العلامة عبد الوهاب النائب، وأُطلق عليها أسم «حميدية مكتبي». ويوجد في المدينة اليوم عدد كبير من المدارس، بعضها مخصص للطلبة الموهوبين مثل ثانوية المتميزين، وكلية بغداد.
التعليم العالي
بالنسبة للتعليم الجامعي، فتحوي المدينة على خمسة جامعات رئيسية. وقد تأسست أول جامعة في المدينة عام 1957، وهي جامعة بغداد، والتي تأسست كمدرسة للحقوق في بادئ الأمر عام 1908. ثم تلاها الجامعات الأخرى، وهي الجامعة المستنصرية، والجامعة التكنولوجية، وجامعة النهرين والجامعة العراقية تأسست العديد من الكليات الاهلية والتي تكون تحت اشراف وزارة التعليم العالي والبحث العلمي، مثل كلية المنصور الجامعة، وكلية بغداد للصيدلة، وغيرها العديد من الكليات والمعاهد.

الثقافة
اشتهرت بغداد منذ العصر العباسي بالشعراء والأدباء والكتاب المعروفين، حيث إن الحراك الثقافي بدأ يُبرز المدينة كواحدة من أكثر العواصم العربية تأثيراً في الثقافة والفنون. ويُعقد في بغداد سنويّا العديد من المهرجانات الثقافية كمهرجان بغداد السينمائي الدولي. وتحوي المدينة على عدد كبير من الصروح الثقافية الهامة كالمسرح الوطني العراقي، المتحف العراقي، ومكتبة بيت الحكمة. بالإضافة إلى عدد من المقاهي الثقافية الشهيرة ودور العرض القديمة التي تقع في شارع الرشيد وشارع المتنبي، وغيرها. كما تزخر بغداد اليوم بالعديد من الأسماء الكبيرة في مجالات الفن والأدب والرسم والسينما وغيرهم الكثير من الفنانين.
وكان الفن البغدادي الحديث قد أنجب في مطلع الخمسينيات من القرن العشرين مجموعة أعمال إبداعية كبيرة ذات سمات جمالية جديدة تميزت بانتمائها الجذري لتاريخ العراق وارتباطها الصريح بتطوره، كما كان لظهور ثورة الشعر الحر في العراق انعكاسًا في ازدهار الوعي الاجتماعي والثقافي في هذه الفترة. وقد أدى هذا إلى تأسيس جماعة بغداد للفن الحديث عام 1951 على يد عدد من رواد الفن العراقي كشاكر حسن آل سعيد وجواد سليم وغيرهم، كما انضم لها نخبة من التشكيليين والمعماريين والفنانين العراقيين فيما بعد.
أصبحت الجماعة بعد ظهورها مركز إشعاع فكري للفنانين العراقيين في الستينات والسبعينات، كما أسهموا في وضع لبنات جديدة إلى صرح الفن العراقي الحديث المعاصر.

من جهة أخرى، تم تأسيس المتحف الوطني للفن الحديث (مركز صدام للفنون سابقًا) في بغداد في ثمانينيات القرن العشرين، والذي ضم نخبة من اللوحات الفنية لرواد الحركة التشكيلية المعاصرة في العراق، إلا أنه تعرض للسرقة والإهمال مؤخرًا.
شهدت البنى التحتية الثقافية في بغداد واقعًا سيئًا بعد الغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003، حيث يتجلى هذا الواقع بنحو خاص في الحال الراهن للمرافق الثقافية. فقد تم إغلاق معظم المتاحف والمكتبات ودور العرض وقاعات الفن التشكيلي في المدينة. في ظل هذه الظروف السيئة، تعد بغداد واحدة من المدن المبدعة في قائمة اليونيسكو للمدن الإبداعية في المجال الأدبي منذ عام 2015م، وتم اختيار بغداد عاصمة للثقافة العربية لعام 2013، وقد شهد هذا العام زخمًا ثقافيًا لم تعهده المدينة منذ عام 2003، حيث اُقيمت عدد من العروض الموسيقية والمسرحية من العراق وبعض الدول العربية، بالإضافة لمعارض الكتاب والفنون التشكيلية وملتقيات شعرية وأدبية أخرى.
التراث والفلكلور

تتميز بغداد بإرث حضاري وتراث فني وموسيقي كبيرين، حيث يُعد المقام العراقي من الفنون الموسيقية العربية القديمة، ويعتبره البعض أرقى شكل من أشكال المقام. وتمتاز المدينة بمقام الجالغي البغدادي، والذي يقوم بأداءه قارئ، بالإضافة إلى عدد من العازفين على آلات السنطور، الجوزة، والطبلة أو الدنبك وأحياناً آلة الرق. ويُعتبر الفنان محمد القبانجي من أهم مؤديي هذا الفن في القرن العشرين.

يُعتبر المتحف البغدادي من أهم الصروح الثقافية التي تؤرخ لتراث بغداد في التاريخ المعاصر. وقد عمدت أمانة بغداد على إنشاء هذا المتحف عام 1968 بالقرب من المدرسة المستنصرية ليضم غالبية المعالم الحياتية لسكان بغداد الأوائل، ويوثق بموضوعية فترة زمنية من تأريخ العاصمة. ويضم اليوم بعد التوسعة 385 تمثالاً توزعت على 77 مشهدا. كما قامت محافظة بغداد في عام 2011 بإعادة تأهيل وافتتاح أحد المباني التراثية القديمة في شارع المتنبي كمركز ثقافي بغدادي، والذي يوفر مصادر تراثية عبر مكتبة بغداد، وهي مكتبة تراثية تعنى بتاريخ وتراث هذه المدينة.
وقد تحدث الكثيرون من الكتاب والمؤرخين عن بغداد القديمة وتأسيسها وتسميتها، ووصفوا تراثها ومميزاته، حيث تميزت المدينة بحرف كثيرة كصناعة النحاسيات (الصفر)، وتعد صناعة الصفر من أقدم الصناعات الشعبية في بغداد والعراق، كما عُرف عن سوق الصفافير أنه قبلة السواح قبل عقود من الزمن، إلا أن السوق في الوقت الحاضر يشهد انحسار كبير بسبب الحروب وأعوام الحصار والوضع الأمني المتدهور، وقطع أجزاء من شارع الرشيد وجعله ممرًا واحدًا.
بغداد في الشعر والفن
لبغداد مكانة كبيرة في ذاكرة الشعراء. وقد كُتب عنها الكثير وروي الأكثر، مثلما تركت على مستوى العمارة والبناء والفعلية الحياتية، مايستحق أن يقال عنه الكثير. ولقد تغنى الأدباء ببغداد على طول امتداد عمرها منذ بناها الخليفة أبو جعفر المنصور. الأبيات التالية هي بعض ما عبّر به شعراء عرب في وصف بغداد:

كذلك ورد ذكر المدينة في بعض الأغاني والقصص الفلكلوريَّة المحليَّة والعربية، كما تغنى بها وبمجدها كبار المغنيين والمغنيات العراقيين والعرب، حيث غنت لها أم كلثوم ومحمد عبد الوهاب وفريد الأطرش وفيروز وكاظم الساهر، وغيرهم.

السياحة
تمتاز بغداد بعدة معالم سياحية وأثرية مثل المتاحف التي تعرض فيها الآثار المختلفة من جواهر وعملات وهياكل بشرية وتماثيل من عصور ما قبل التاريخ حتى القرن السابع عشر الميلادي. ومن شواهدها الأبدية الآثار الإسلامية التي تتمثل في بقايا سور بغداد ودار الخلافة والمدرسة المستنصرية التي فيها ساعة المدرسة المستنصرية العجيبة ومقر المعتصم ومسجده الشهير وتحتوي على مساجد تاريخية عديدة منها: جامع الخلفاء والذي كان يسمى جامع الخليفة، ومسجد الإمام الأعظم أبو حنيفة في الأعظمية، وجامع الأحمدية والذي فيه مدرسة تاريخية هي مدرسة الأحمدية، ومسجد الإمام موسى الكاظم وفيه الحضرة الكاظمية، وجامع مرجان في سوق الشورجة، وجامع المنصور وجامع المهدي وجامع الرصافة، بالإضافة لمدارس تاريخية عريقة كالمدرسة الشرفية بجوار قبر أبي حنيفة النعمان والمدرسة الموفقية ومدرسة الآصفية، والمدرسة القادرية، والمدرسة النظامية. وتعاني المباني التراثية لبغداد حاليا من الإهمال والتعدي عليها، خاصة بعد الغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003.
كما تحوي المدينة عدد من المناطق الترفيهية، مثل مدينة ألعاب الرصافة، ومدينة العاب الكرخ، وجزيرة بغداد السياحية، متنزه الزوراء، وجزيرة الأعراس، والخضراء، وغيرها. هذا بالإضافة إلى عدد من النوادي الاجتماعية مثل: نادي الصيد، نادي الفروسية، نادي العلوية، ونادي الهندية، ونادي المنصور .

الرياضة
يوجد في بغداد عدد من ملاعب كرة القدم القديمة، وعدد من الصالات الرياضية المُغلقة، التي صمم إحداها المعمار العالمي لي كوربوزيه. وقد تم إنشاء أول ملاعب المدينة في عام 1966، بعد أن وُضع حجر الأساس في عهد الزعيم عبد الكريم قاسم، حيث يتسع الملعب لخمسين ألف متفرج. وهو أكبر ملاعب المدينة إلى هذا اليوم. ومن الملاعب الأخرى في المدينة ملعب الجيش، ملعب الزوراء، وملعب القوة الجوية. كما تحوي كلية التربية الرياضية على عدد من المنشآت الرياضية الكبيرة داخل حرم جامعة بغداد.
يُشار بالذكر إلى أن العمل جارِ على تنفيذ مدينة رياضية في منطقة التاجي شمال بغداد، تبلغ مساحتها مايقارب 500 دونم، وتشمل الملعب الأولمبي الرئيسي الذي يتسع لستين ألف متفرج، وثلاثة ملاعب للتدريب، اثنان منها في الجانبين الجنوبي والشمالي من الموقع سعة كل واحد منهما 500 متفرج والثالث يتسع لـ 5000 متفرج.
لقد عانى القطاع الرياضي في العراق من الإهمال والعقوبات الدولية بعد الحروب المتتالية التي شهدتها البلاد، وخصوصا الغزو الأمريكي للعراق. وقد كان للمنتخب العراقي لكرة القدم أول مبارياته الدولية على أرضه منذ 2003 مع نظيره الفلسطيني في مدينتيّ بغداد وأربيل عام 2009، حيث شكل هذا الحدث، مؤشرًا هامًا لعودة الحياة الطبيعية إلى العراق.

الصحة
تأسس في بغداد عام 1973 أحد أكبر الصروح الطبية في منطقة الشرق الأوسط، وهو مدينة الطب، حيث تضم بين دفتيها خمسة مستشفيات كبرى، هي دار التمريض الخاص، والجراحات التخصصية، وأمراض الجهاز الهضمي والكبد، وبغداد التعليمي، وحماية الأطفال. وجميعها في مجال الطوارئ تعتمد على طوارئ مستشفى بغداد التعليمي الذي يحتوي على قسم للطوارئ يضم أكبر قاعتين لطوارئ الباطنية والجراحية (عدا حماية الأطفال) فضلا عن الاحالات من المستشفيات الأخرى وإسعاف جرحى الانفجارات الذين يحتاجون إلى استنفار الجهود وتوفير العلاج اللازم لاسيما تعويضهم بما يحتاجونه من الدم.
الجدول التالي يظهر أهم المستشفيات الموجودة في بغداد:

مشاكل
الوضع الأمني

شهدت بغداد أسوةً بمعظم مدن العراق، تدهورًا أمنيًا كبيرًا كان أحد نتائج الغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003، والذي لا تزال تعاني منه حتى اليوم. حيث عمِت المدينة مؤخرًا الفوضى والفتن الطائفية وجرائم القتل المختلفة من تفجيرات إنتحارية وسيارت مفخخة على يد منظمات متشددة.
التلوث والعشوائيات

تعاني مدينة بغداد في الوقت الحاضر من النمو السكاني والعمراني المتزايد لا سيما بعد سقوط الحكم البعثي وما شهدته من هجرة كبيرة سواء أكان من المناطق الريفية ومن المحافظات الأخرى ومن خارج العراق.
تُعد المركبات أبرز مسبّبات التلوث في بغداد، مع توقف تنفيذ شبكات الطرق السريعة في المدينة. كما تُعد المناطق الصناعية المنتشرة في المدينة وما تبعثه المصانع والمعامل المختلفة إلى الجو من ملوثات من أهم المسببات كذلك. ويوجد في بغداد عدد كبير من الصناعات الملوثة للهواء داخل المدينة، بعضًا منها من الصناعات الكبرى التي يفترض أبعادها إلى خارج حدود التصاميم الأساسية مثل محطة توليد الكهرباء في الدورة ومحطة توليد كهرباء جنوب بغداد. هناك أيضًا سبب آخر لتلوث الهواء في بغداد، وهو العواصف الترابية التي تهب في أغلب أيام الصيف بسبب عدم وجود مناطق الأحزمة الخضراء حول المدينة وافتقارها إلى مناطق خضراء محيطة بالمناطق السكنية، وكذلك انتشار المولدات الكهربائية الصغيرة بأعداد كبيرة.
أما فيما يخص التلوث المائي، فقد عانى نهر دجلة الذي يخترق المدينة في السنوات الأخيرة من التلوث بشكل كبير. وقد أعلنت وزارة البيئة العراقية عن ارتفاع نسبة التلوث في النهر بصورة كبيرة عند دخول مياهه إلى مدينة بغداد، حيث إن عشرات آلاف اللترات بالثانية من مياه الصرف غير الصحي ترمى في النهر.
الأزمات المرورية

تشهد بغداد اختناقات مرورية كبيرة بسبب غلق الكثير من الطرق الفرعية والرئيسية بكتل كونكريتية مختلفة الأحجام والأغراض بعد الغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003. ويُعزى وجود هذه الكتل إلى الوضع الأمني الراهن بالبلد ولحماية الأسواق وأماكن التجمعات من التفجيرات والأعمال المسلحة. كما تعود أسباب الأزمات المرورية أيضاً إلى قدم تصاميم شوارع المدينة، بالإضافة إلى العدد الكبير من المركبات المُسجلة مؤخراً، فهناك أكثر من مليون ونصف المليون سيارة في المدينة وحدها. كما تؤدي المواكب الدينية إلى إغلاق تام لبعض شوارع المدينة لإفساح المجال لمرور مئات آلاف الزوار إلى المراقد والمساجد الكبرى في المدينة.
الخدمات
شهد وضع الخدمات في بغداد تدهورًا كبيرًا بعد الحروب التي خاضها العراق في العقود الأخيرة، وخصوصًا حرب الخليج الثانية عام 1991، والغزو الأمريكي للعراق عام 2003، وما تبعه من أحداث أدت إلى وصول حال الخدمات العامة إلى مستويات متدنية جداً. حيث احتلت بغداد المرتبة الأخيرة عالميًا عام 2012، كأسوأ مدينة للعيش في العالم بحسب مسح قامت به مجموعة «ميرسل» العالمية لاستشارات الموارد البشرية، التي يقع مقرها في نيويورك. حيث استند التقرير إلى الأوضاع التي تعيشها بغداد، من حيث سوء الخدمات العامة، والاضطرابات السياسية، والاختناقات بالحواجر الكونكريتية وتراكم القمامة والمباني المهدمة، إضافة إلى الانقطاع في التيار الكهربائي، ومشاكل شبكة الصرف الصحي البدائية، حيث تعاني المدينة من فياضانات كبيرة أثناء فصل الشتاء. ويأتي هذا التصنيف أيضًا إلى جانب تقرير آخر أطلقته منظمة اليونسكو عام 2012، تم بموجبه تصنيف بغداد بالمرتبة الثالثة كأوسخ مدن العالم، وثامن عاصمة على مستوى التلوث البيئي.

مدن شقيقة
المدن الشقيقة لبغداد هي:

 أذربيجان - باكو 
 الأردن - عمّان 
 سوريا - دمشق
 لبنان - بيروت 
 مصر - القاهرة 
 اليمن - صنعاء
 رومانيا - بوخارست 
 إيران - طهران

معرض صور
انظر أيضًا
تاريخ بغداد
أبواب بغداد
الوقف في العراق

مصادر
مراجع
البداية والنهاية في التاريخ - ابن كثير.
تاريخ بغداد – الخطيب البغدادي - دار الكتب العلمية – بيروت.
موجز تأريخ بغداد القديم والحديث - علي ظريف عبد المجيد الأعظمي (المتوفي عام 1958م) - بغداد - 1926م.
البغداديون أخبارهم ومجالسهم - إبراهيم عبد الغني الدروبي - بغداد - مطبعة الرابطة 1958.
دليل خارطة بغداد المفصل - الدكتور مصطفى جواد والدكتور أحمد سوسة - مطبعة المجمع العلمي العراقي - بغداد - 1958م.
أعيان الزمان وجيران النعمان في مقبرة الخيزران - وليد الأعظمي - مكتبة الرقيم - بغداد - 2001م.
تاريخ العراق في العصر السلجوقي - الدكتور حسين أمين - بغداد - مطبعة الإرشاد 1385هـ/1965م.
المنتظم في تاريخ الملوك والأمم - ابن الجوزي البغدادي - حيدر آباد الدكن 1359هـ.
أربعة قرون من تاريخ العراق - تأليف ستيفن همسلي لونكريك - تعريب (جعفر خياط) - الطبعة الثالثة - بغداد 1962م.
بغداد القديمة - عبد الكريم بن مصطفى البغدادي العلاف - بغداد - مطبعة المعارف - 1960م.

وصلات خارجية

موقع أمانة بغداد
تقارير، خرائط، وتقييم للعراق
صور فضائية لبغداد
الهيئة الوطنية للإستثمار في العراق
دليل الإستثمار في العراق
خارطة تفاعلية
العراق - المجتمع الحضري
تصور إعادة الإعمار في العراق
وصف للتخطيط الأصلي بغداد
خريطة التزيع الإثني والطائفي في بغداد
مخطط بغداد بعصر النهضة
مستثمرو الإمارات العربية المتحدة حريصون على المشاركة في مشروع النهضة ببغداد
رجل مغ خطة، هشام أشكوري
ما وراء بغداد 9.11


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 5,872
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bagdad
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bagdad (en arabe : بَغْدَاد, baġdād, /baɣˈdaːd/ ) est la capitale de l’Irak et de la province de Bagdad. Située au centre-est du pays, elle est traversée par le fleuve Tigre. Ses habitants sont appelés « Bagdadiens » (au féminin : « Bagdadiennes »).
Avec une aire urbaine comprenant une population estimée à 10 millions d’habitants en 2012, c’est la plus grande ville d’Irak, ainsi que la deuxième ville la plus peuplée du monde arabe et du Moyen-Orient (derrière Le Caire, la capitale de l'Égypte). C'est un carrefour de communications aériennes, routières et ferroviaires d'une grande importance stratégique pour la république d'Irak.
Les origines de la ville actuelle remontent au moins au VIIIe siècle, avec, probablement, la présence de plusieurs petits foyers d'habitat antérieurs datant de la période préislamique. Elle fut la capitale du califat abbasside à partir du VIIIe siècle et un centre de culture et de connaissance très important pendant des siècles, jusqu’au milieu du XIIIe siècle. De 2003 (voir l'article « Bataille de Bagdad ») à 2011 (voir la section « 2011 » de l'article « Liste d'attentats de la guerre d'Irak »), Bagdad a été le centre d’un violent conflit en raison de la guerre d’Irak, déclenchée à la suite de l'invasion du pays par les États-Unis. Elle est devenue une ville d'enclaves fortifiées régies par les soldats des Forces armées irakiennes, les officiers de la police fédérale, les agents de police locaux et les agents de sécurité privés.

Étymologie
L’origine du nom « Bagdad » et sa signification sont disputées : les auteurs arabes classiques, suivis par les écrivains modernes, penchent pour une origine persane, l'explication la plus souvent avancée étant que le mot signifie « donné par Dieu » en persan antique ; la haute estime des Abbassides pour la culture persane pourrait expliquer l’adoption d’un nom d'origine perse pour la capitale d’un califat arabe. Cependant, l’étymon assyro-araméen « forteresse de l’aigle » a également été proposé.[réf. nécessaire]
Ce nom est à l’origine du mot baldaquin, qui désigne d’abord la soie de Bagdad (Baldac ou Baudac au Moyen Âge), puis une tenture de lit.
La ville fut officiellement nommée Madīnat as-Salām (la cité de la paix) par son fondateur, le calife Al-Mansour. Elle était également connue sous les noms de Madīnat al-Anwār (« cité des Lumières »),ʿĀsimat ad-Dunyā (« capitale ou centre du monde »), la ville ronde et la ville d’Al Mansour.

Géographie
Site
Bagdad se trouve sur les rives du Tigre, qui est sa première source d'eau, à l'endroit où celui-ci se rapproche le plus de l'Euphrate, distant d'une trentaine de kilomètres à l'ouest de la ville.
Le terrain sur lequel la ville fut construite est d'origine alluviale. Plat et de faible altitude, il est sujet à de nombreuses inondations périodiques.

Problème de l'eau
Considérée sous l'aspect géopolitique et hydrologique, la région historique de Mésopotamie regroupe deux pays, l'Irak et la Syrie. La caractéristique du bassin mésopotamien réside en l'origine éloignée de ses eaux fluviales, qui prennent leur source dans les montagnes turques et iraniennes. La situation géographique de l'Irak le rend vulnérable puisqu'il est encerclé par des pays (Turquie, Syrie, Iran) capables de lui couper son approvisionnement en eau. C'est ainsi que la question de l'eau est, dans la politique extérieure de Bagdad, au cœur de tensions incessantes. Après la guerre sur l'Irak, le problème de l'eau s'est aggravé. Dans certains quartiers, l’eau courante n’est pas disponible plus de deux heures par jour. Le Comité international de la Croix-Rouge (CICR) mène, depuis de nombreuses années, d'importants projets pour améliorer l'accès à l'eau potable, y compris une distribution quotidienne, par camion-citerne, à des milliers de déplacés internes près de Madinat al-Sadr (Sadr City), à Bagdad. Après des années de négligence, le réseau d’eau a également souffert de dommages plus récents dus aux vibrations causées par les bombes et le passage des tanks. Des estimations récentes de l'Organisation des Nations unies (ONU) montrent que près de 94 % de l’eau de Bagdad est perdue pour cause de fuites. La distribution d’eau, les sanitaires, l’électricité et les services de santé dans le centre et le sud de l’Irak ont été particulièrement frappés par les pillages et les mises à sac lors des semaines chaotiques qui ont suivi la chute de l’ancien gouvernement.

Climat
Le climat désertique de Bagdad en fait l'une des plus chaudes régions du monde pendant l'été, surtout quand le vent du golfe Persique souffle (on atteint environ 45 °C en juillet). En hiver, la pluviosité est de 136 mm et le thermomètre oscille en moyenne entre 6 et 18 °C en décembre, et entre 4 et 16 °C en janvier. Il y a une douzaine de jours de gel par an, avec des températures parfois assez basses (minimum de −6 °C).

Histoire
Califat abbasside
Madīnat as-Salām fut fondée ex nihilo au VIIIe siècle, en 762, par le calife abbasside Abou-Djaafar Al-Mansur et construite en quatre ans par 100 000 ouvriers. Selon les historiens arabes, il existait à son emplacement plusieurs villages pré-islamiques, dont l'un s'appelait Bagdad. Ce nom est cité dans le Talmud, de deux siècles antérieur. Cependant, selon l'historien Thierry Murcia, l'édition du Talmud de Babylone serait plus tardive que ce que l'on envisage actuellement. Elle remonterait seulement à la deuxième moitié du VIIIe siècle voire au début du IXe siècle de notre ère. Murcia estime d'ailleurs que « ce travail éditorial aurait même pu avoir été achevé dans la ville même de Bagdad », ce qui pourrait expliquer les mentions répétées de cette métropole dans le corpus de textes rabbiniques. Après la prise du pouvoir par les Abbassides au détriment des Omeyyades de Damas en 750, l'emplacement est choisi pour y fonder la capitale du califat. Même si, à partir du Xe siècle, elle a pour rivales dans cette fonction, d'abord Le Caire (avec la dynastie des Fatimides), puis Cordoue avec le nouveau califat des Omeyyades, elle joue le rôle d'une des capitales de l'islam et le restera jusqu'au milieu du XIIIe siècle.
La Bagdad des Abbassides était une ville ronde dont les dimensions ont fait l'objet de la part des auteurs arabes de nombreuses estimations différentes. Son diamètre était probablement de 2 534 m. Elle possédait quatre portes : la porte de Syrie au nord-ouest, la porte de Bassora au sud-ouest, la porte de Koufa au sud-est et la porte du Khorasan au nord-est. Elle était protégée par un fossé de vingt mètres de large et une double enceinte circulaire qui, en plus des quatre portes, comportait 112 tours. Le palais, la mosquée et les casernes se trouvaient au centre, tandis qu'un ou deux anneaux d'habitations étaient situés entre les deux remparts. La ville ronde était dominée par le dôme vert du palais, de 48,36 mètres de haut. Ce dôme qui fit la gloire de Bagdad se serait effondré en 941 à cause de la foudre. Des faubourgs furent aussi édifiés extra-muros, dont le quartier du Karkh, au sud de la ville ronde, où étaient notamment situés les marchés. La ville ronde fut assez rapidement abandonnée par le calife et ses administrations, et des palais furent construits dans les faubourgs. Dès 773, Al-Mansur édifia au nord-est un nouveau palais, Al-Khuld, dont le nom rappelait le paradis.
Comme la ville devenait une énorme agglomération, dont la population remuante inspirait la méfiance du calife, en 774, Al-Mansur transféra les marchés vers un nouveau quartier au sud de la Ville Ronde, qui fut appelé Al-Karkh, entre les canaux Sarat et Isa. Sous son règne également, on construisit sur la rive orientale du Tigre un camp militaire pour son fils, auquel il emprunta son nom, ʿAskar Al-Mahdi ou « camp d'Al-Mahdi », dans le quartier que l'on appela plus tard Al-Rusafa (en).
Sous Harun al-Rashid, cinquième calife de la dynastie abbasside, les membres de la famille des Barmakides occupaient le poste de vizir. Jafar fit bâtir sur la rive orientale du Tigre au sud-est de Bagdad un palais qui devait jouer un rôle important dans le développement ultérieur de la ville.
En 813, le califat était déchiré par une guerre civile entre les deux fils d'Harun al-Rashid, Al-Amin et Al-Ma'mūn. Elle se termina par le siège de Bagdad (en) par les forces d'Al-Ma'mūn. Il dura quatorze mois. Face à la défense acharnée de la population, les assiégeants détruisirent une grande partie de la ville ronde, qui ne s'en releva jamais.

À partir de Al-Muʿtasim (833-842), les califes abbassides achetèrent des esclaves turcs, appelés ghulams, pour se constituer une armée dont il attendaient plus de loyauté que de leurs partisans khorassaniens. Entre ces troupes turbulentes et la population de Bagdad les heurts étaient fréquents. Ce calife décida donc de déplacer sa capitale vers Samarra. En 865, le calife d'Al-Musta`in, qui se trouvait de plus en plus sous la tutelle des Turcs, quitta Samarra et retourna à Bagdad. Les Turcs ne l'entendirent pas de cette oreille et choisirent al-Mutazz comme nouveau calife. Bagdad fut à nouveau assiégée. Le gouverneur de la ville, Mohammed ibn Abadalla ibn Tahir, fit fortifier la ville et enrôla tous les habitants dans sa défense. Affamée et excédée par la durée du siège, la population manifesta son mécontentement et des émeutes éclatèrent. Le gouverneur Tahir, tout en protestant de sa fidélité à Al-Musta`in, entama des négociations avec les Turcs. En 866, 'Al-Musta`in fut destitué puis exécuté.
Le départ du calife n'avait pas entamé la vitalité commerciale et l'éclat intellectuel de Bagdad, où, le calife Al-Mutamid revint définitivement en 892. Il s'installa dans l'ancien palais de Jafar le Barmakide. Après sa construction, il avait été cédé à Al-Manum, qui le donna à son tour à un de ses principaux serviteurs, Al-Hasan ibn Sahl (en). Il prit alors le nom de palais Hasani. Il fut ensuite occupé par sa fille Buran, veuve d'Al-Mamun, jusqu'au retour à Bagdad d'al-Mutamid. À ce palais vinrent s'en ajouter d'autres : al-Firdus (« paradis »), al-Taj (« couronne ») ainsi qu'al-Thuraya (« Pléiades »), relié au palais al-Hasani par un couloir souterrain. Cet ensemble devint au fil du temps le Dar al-Khalifa (« demeure du Califat »).
C'est à Bagdad qu'est fondée en 832 la plus ancienne maison de la sagesse (Bayt al-hikma), sous le règne d'Al-Mamun. C'est un établissement particulièrement actif, spécialisé dans la traduction d'ouvrages en grec, pehlevi et syriaque. Des savants y viennent de tout l'Empire abbasside, facilitant l'introduction de la science perse, grecque et indienne dans le monde arabo-musulman de cette époque. Astronomes, mathématiciens, penseurs, lettrés, traducteurs, la fréquentent, et parmi eux, al-Khwarizmi, Al Jahiz, al Kindi, Al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf ibn Matar et Thābit ibn Qurra.
Bagdad devient la plaque tournante du grand commerce :

ports du golfe Persique (Ubullah, port de Bassora ou Sirâf) vers l'Inde (épices, pierres précieuses), la Chine (soie), le Yémen (parfums) et l'Afrique orientale (bois précieux, ivoire, or) ;
route de la soie par l'Asie centrale ;
routes terrestres vers les Bulgares de la Volga, le monde scandinave (peaux et fourrures), Constantinople, l'Occident chrétien, le Soudan…
Bagdad importe des esclaves (slaves, turcs, africains) et des matières premières (bois de construction, fer) et exporte des matières premières (alun) et des produits de l'artisanat (tissus, objets de verre et de métal, entre autres).
Certains historiens de la démographie considèrent Bagdad comme la première ville au monde à avoir atteint une population d’un million d'habitants entre les VIIIe et IXe siècles (la capitale chinoise Chang'an (Xi'an), terminus de la route de la soie, était aussi une très grande ville à cette époque). Affaiblie par des troubles politiques, sa place de « ville la plus peuplée au monde » lui est probablement ravie par Cordoue au Xe siècle. On estime la population de l'ancienne « capitale » des Francs, Aix-la-Chapelle, à environ 10 000 habitants à la même époque.
Au xe siècle, sous l'effet des incendies et des inondations récurrents, sans parler du déménagement des califes, la ville unifiée se transforme en une série de quartiers semi-autonomes séparés par des terrains vagues, des ruines et des jardins. Ce phénomène s'accompagne d'un clivage religieux, certains quartiers étant chiites, d'autres sunnites. Vers le milieu du siècle, sous le règne de califes faibles et reclus dans leurs palais, Bagdad fut livré à l'anarchie et aux affrontements confessionnels entre chiites et sunnites. En 945, un prince bouyide chiite originaire du Daylam, s'empara de la ville et mit le calife Al-Mustakfi sous tutelle. Il devint amîr al-umarâ' (« émir des émirs ») et prit le titre honorifique de Mu`izz ad-Dawla (« réconfort de la dynastie »). Il se fit construire un palais dans le quartier dépeuplé de Shamasiya sur la rive orientale du Tigre. Il fit également construire sur les sites de l'ancien palais Khuld, un hôpital, le Bimaristan Adudi, qui devint le plus célèbre du monde musulman de l'époque. Un de ses successeurs, Adhud ad-Dawla, entreprend à partir de 979 la reconstruction de la ville. Il fait restaurer les mosquées, le réseau d'eau et les ponts. Il bâtit un complexe encore plus somptueux, dont les jardins s'étendaient jusqu'au Tigre. Les conflits confessionnels se poursuivirent. Au cours d'une émeute particulièrement violente, en 1051, la mosquée chiite de Kadhimiya, abritant les restes du septième et du neuvième imam chiite, fut incendiée par les sunnites. En 1055, le Turc seldjoukide Toghrul-Beg, sollicité par le calife, chassa sans beaucoup de mal, la dynastie bouyide, minée par les dissensions internes. Après avoir pris le titre de sultan, les Seldjoukides portèrent relativement peu d'intérêt à leur nouvelle possession. Ils désignèrent un gouverneur de Bagdad, où ils résidèrent rarement. Ils prirent le contre-pied des Bouyides et appuyèrent les sunnites. L'affaiblissement progressif des Seldjoukides incita les califes de la fin du XIIe siècle à réaffirmer leur autorité. En 1157, le sultan Muhammad, irrité par les velléités d'indépendance du calife Al-Muqtafi vint assiéger Bagdad. Au bout de près de trois mois, face à la défense énergique de la ville, il leva le siège. L'événement marqua la fin de la domination seldjoukide à Bagdad.
À la fin du XIe siècle, Bagdad était formée de deux grandes parties :

sur la rive est du Tigre, les habitants de Rusafa, s'installèrent plus au sud, où se forma un nouveau quartier, Muktadiya, à proximité des palais califaux. L'ensemble fut doté d'une enceinte par Al-Mustazhir en 1095. En 1221, le calife An-Nasir rénova les fortifications auxquelles il flanqua des bastions. Une seule porte est encore conservée : Bab al-Wastani dont la tour mesure 14,5 mètres de haut pour une circonférence de 56 mètres ;
sur la rive ouest, il ne restait pratiquement plus de trace de la ville ronde, à l'exception de la grande mosquée. Khark, par contre, continuait à prospérer.

Le déclin de Bagdad s'accentua lorsqu'elle fut ravagée par les Mongols de Houlagou Khan en 1258, après un siège de 20 jours, du 20 janvier jusqu'au 10 février, épisode de la bataille de Bagdad. La ville tout entière fut désarmée et sa population massacrée. Le Bayt al-Hikma, ou maison de la sagesse, fut pillé et son contenu jeté dans le Tigre : traités philosophiques, livres d'art, de poésie et d'histoire, ouvrages scientifiques et mathématiques — la richesse intellectuelle de plusieurs siècles. On dit que quand le pillage mongol prit fin, le Tigre était noir d'encre. Le calife Al-Musta'sim fut tué par les envahisseurs. Cet événement constitua une rupture dans l'histoire de Bagdad, qui cessa définitivement d'être le siège du califat.

Des Mongols aux Ottomans
La ville n'était plus que l'ombre d'elle-même mais survécut. Jusqu'en 1339, elle fit partie du domaine de la dynastie mongole des Ilkhanides. Le célèbre voyageur Ibn Battûta a laissé une description de la ville à cette époque. Ensuite Hassan Bozorg, le fondateur de la dynastie des Jalayirides, s'y installa.
La ville fut prise deux fois par Tamerlan, la première fois en 1393 sans subir trop de dommages. En 1401, en revanche, il fit massacrer tous les habitants, n'épargnant que les hommes de religion. De 1410 à 1507, Bagdad tomba entre les mains des Turcomans du Mouton noir et des Turcomans du Mouton blanc. Jamais la ville n'était tombée aussi bas. L'historien égyptien Al-Makrizi écrivit en 1437 qu'elle ne méritait pas le nom de ville. En 1444, un voyageur vénitien, Nicolo de Conti, la confondit, comme d'autres européens, avec Babylone.
En 1507, Bagdad fut occupée par les Safavides persans. Elle tomba ensuite entre les mains des Ottomans : Soliman le Magnifique s'en empara en 1534. Bagdad se révolta contre eux en 1623 puis, au cours de la Troisième guerre turco–séfévide (1623-1639), soutint un long siège, et ne fut prise qu'en 1638 par Mourad IV. Ce siège, qui dura 39 jours et mobilisa des dizaines de milliers d'hommes eut un retentissement jusqu'en France, puisqu'il apparaît dans le premier numéro de la Gazette de Théophraste Renaudot : il est l'acte final du conflit entre Ottomans et Perses.
Après 1638, en effet, les guerres entre les Ottomans et les Safavides connurent une longue trêve. Entre 1638 et 1704, Bagdad fut gouvernée par 34 pachas, presque tous incompétents ou cruels[réf. nécessaire]. Réduite à l'état de bourgade insignifiante aux confins de l'Empire ottoman, perpétuellement menacée par les tribus bédouines des environs, elle ne comptait plus qu'une quinzaine de milliers d'habitants. En 1704, un homme énergique, Hassan Pacha, fut nommé gouverneur de Bagdad. Il entreprit d'acheter de jeunes esclaves pour en faire une armée de Mamelouks. Il eut tôt fait de mettre au pas les tribus bédouines et d'étendre son pouvoir de Mossoul au nord à Bassora au sud. Son fils, Ahmed, lui succéda en 1723, au grand dépit du gouvernement de Constantinople qui n'exerçait plus qu'une autorité nominale sur Bagdad. En 1733, Ahmed dut faire face à une menace grave : le nouveau maître de la Perse, Nâdir Châh, vint mettre le siège devant Bagdad, comptant sur la famine pour forcer la ville à se rendre. Elle ne dut son salut qu'à l'arrivée d'une armée de secours ottomane. Une nouvelle tentative perse en 1744 se solda également par un échec. Après la mort d'Ahmed, le pouvoir des mamelouks, qui occupaient tous les postes importants, dura jusqu'en 1831. Au mois de mars de cette année Bagdad fut touchée par une épidémie de peste, suivie en avril d'une crue du Tigre particulièrement dévastatrice, qui emporta une partie des murailles et 7 000 maisons. Entre la moitié et les deux-tiers de la population disparurent. Le sultan Mahmoud II profita de l'occasion pour restaurer l'autorité de la Sublime Porte. Les mamelouks furent exterminés et un gouverneur nommé directement par Constantinople.

Au sein de l'Empire ottoman, qui cherchait à se réformer, Bagdad commença elle-même à se moderniser. La population s'accrut peu à peu. En 1853, elle était évaluée à 60 000 personnes, en 1877 à 70 ou 80 000 et à la fin du XIXe siècle à 100 000. Les puissances européennes commençaient à s'y intéresser : un résident britannique nommé par la Compagnie britannique des Indes orientales s'y était installé dès 1798. En 1862, les Britanniques créèrent une compagnie de bateaux à vapeur qui assurait la liaison entre Bagdad et Bassora sur le Tigre. Sous le gouvernement éclairé de Midhat Pacha, une ligne de tramway relia Bagdad à Kadhimiya. Ce pacha créa également la première maison d'édition et le premier journal de Bagdad, ainsi que des écoles. Il mit également sur pied un conseil municipal élu. Une décision malheureuse pour le patrimoine de Bagdad fut la démolition des murailles séculaires de la ville en 1868, pour en faire des boulevards qui ne virent jamais le jour.
Au cours de la Première Guerre mondiale les Ottomans s'engagèrent dans le conflit aux côtés des Allemands. Après qu'un corps expéditionnaire britannique eut subi une terrible défaite à Kut en 1916, le gouverneur de Bagdad décida de tracer à travers le lacis de ruelles de la rive orientale une large artère (à peu près) droite, afin de faciliter le mouvement des troupes. Cette artère, que l'on appela plus tard la rue Rachid, transforma radicalement le paysage de la ville.

Du mandat britannique à la chute de la monarchie
Le 11 mars 1917, un corps expéditionnaire britannique entre à Bagdad, capitale de la Mésopotamie (l'Irak actuel), et en chasse les Turcs ottomans. Lors de la conférence de San Remo (1920), la Grande-Bretagne reçoit un mandat de la part de la Société des Nations pour administrer trois vilayets ottomans (Bagdad, Bassora et Mossoul).

En 1921, Bagdad est déclarée capitale du nouveau royaume d'Irak.

En avril 1941, Rachid Ali al-Gillani, un homme politique antibritannique, comptant sur l'appui allemand, fit un coup d'État. Les Britanniques ripostèrent en envoyant un corps expéditionnaire qui atteignit Bagdad le 31 mai. Dans la nuit du 1er juin, un violent pogrom éclata dans la capitale. Au cours de ces événements, connus sous le nom de Farhoud, quelque 200 Juifs furent tués, de façon souvent horrible.
En 1948 l’Irak entre en guerre contre l’Etat Juif ( Israël ). A la suite de la victoire Israélienne les juifs d’Irak à partir de 1950 sont expulsés et spoliés ( notamment un bâtiment qui héberge aujourd’hui encore l’ambassade de France  ) les juifs de Bagdad qui représentaient 40% de la population.
Dans les années 1950, de nombreux projets architecturaux ou urbanistiques virent le jour grâce à la manne pétrolière. Certains aboutirent, comme le Musée national d'Irak conçu dans les années 1930 par l'architecte allemand Werner March, qui fut réalisé une vingtaine d'années plus tard. D'autres ne furent jamais exécutés, comme le projet de Le Corbusier pour une cité olympique, dont seul le gymnase fut finalement construit sous Saddam Hussein, ou encore les plans de Frank Lloyd Wright pour un nouveau Bagdad.

Le 14 juillet 1958, la monarchie fut renversée lors d'un coup d'État dirigé par le général Kasem. Le roi Fayçal II fut tué ainsi que toute la famille royale. Les corps mutilés du prince héritier Abd al-Ilah et du Premier ministre Nouri Saïd furent exhibés dans les rues de Bagdad.

De l'avènement de la république à la chute de Saddam Hussein
En 1968, un coup d'État permet au Parti Baas de s'emparer du pouvoir. En 1979, Saddam Hussein devint président. Au cours de la guerre Iran-Irak (1980-1988), Bagdad se trouvait loin de la zone de combats, mais, à partir de 1985, au cours de la « guerre des villes », elle fut touchée par des missiles sol-sol iraniens, qui sapèrent le moral de la population.

Après la guerre d'Irak le problème de l'eau s'est aggravé. Dans certains quartiers l’eau courante n’est pas disponible plus de deux heures par jour. Le Comité international de la Croix-Rouge (CICR) mène, depuis de nombreuses années, d'importants projets pour améliorer l'accès à l'eau potable.

Durant l'opération liberté irakienne, après 21 jours de bombardements, les forces américaines, après avoir rencontré une faible résistance aux portes de Bagdad, prennent le contrôle de la ville à partir du 9 avril 2003. Cela est symbolisé par une statue géante de Saddam Hussein renversée par un char américain en direct devant les médias. Le jour même, des pillages commencent, notamment au musée national d'Irak, dans les hôpitaux et les bâtiments administratifs.

L'après Saddam
À partir de 2003, avec l'attentat du 19 août contre le siège de l'ONU et la mort de l'envoyé spécial de cette organisation Sergio Vieira de Mello, la ville est touchée par des attentats et la violence, ce qui a conduit à ce que certains comparent à une épuration ethnique, les membres des diverses communautés chiites et sunnites se regroupant dans des quartiers à part.

Éducation
La Mustansiriya Madrasah fut fondé en 1227 par le calife Al-Mustansir. L'édifice fut rebaptisé université al-Mustansiriyah en 1963. Il s'agit de la plus grande université d'Irak et de la seconde plus importante du monde arabe.
Le collège de Bagdad, fondé en 1932, est un lycée d’élite pour les garçons âgés de 11 à 18 ans.
Avant que survienne la guerre du Golfe, la ville accueillait plusieurs écoles internationales dont :

École française de Bagdad ;
Deutsche Schule Bagdad ;
Baghdad Japanese School (バグダッド日本人学校).

Universités
Outre l'université Al-Mustansiriya, la ville accueille aussi d'autres universités :

université irakienne ;
université d'Al-Nahrain ;
université de Bagdad ;
université de technologie (Irak).

Culture
Bagdad a toujours rayonné par sa culture à travers le monde arabe et au-delà, ayant accueilli, inspirée et joué le rôle de mécène pour nombre d'artistes. Beaucoup d'artistes du monde arabe ont fréquenté la ville, tels Nizar Kabbani, Oum Kalthoum ou Fairuz.
Le dialecte arabe de Bagdad diffère des autres centres urbains d'Irak ; il contient plus de caractéristiques propres aux dialectes nomades, cela est probablement dû aux multiples exodes et repopulations que connut la ville durant le Moyen Âge.
La ville abrite un théâtre, le théâtre national irakien (en), qui connut des dommages avec la guerre au cours de la première décennie du XXIe siècle, et dans lequel se produit l'Orchestre national (en) depuis 1944.
Le théâtre national connut un élan dans les années 1990 lorsque survinrent des sanctions de l'ONU sur l'importation de films étrangers.
Il abrite une École de Musique et de Ballet et Institut des Beaux-Arts.
Des musées sont également présents, abritant de nombreux trésors de l'Antiquité et de civilisations disparues.

Rayonnement intellectuel
Bagdad occupa, au cours des premiers siècles suivant sa fondation, une place prépondérante dans la production littéraire, artistique et intellectuelle arabo-musulmane, sous le patronage des hauts dignitaires de la cour abbasside. L’école Mustansiriya, construite par le calife abbasside Al-Mustansir bi-llah, est considérée comme l’une des plus vieilles universités arabo-islamiques où on enseignait les sciences du Coran de la tradition de Mahomet, les doctrines islamiques, les sciences de la langue arabe, les mathématiques, les préceptes de l’islam et les différentes disciplines de la médecine. La ville devient rapidement le premier centre culturel du monde, accueillant près d'un million de personnes. Au milieu du IXe siècle est créée la maison de la sagesse où l’on procède à la traduction de grands philosophes grecs et des personnes viennent d’Europe ou d’autres parts du monde pour se spécialiser en médecine, en physique, en astronomie, en météorologie, en mathématiques et dans tous les domaines.

Monuments et lieux
Palais abbasside (XIIe siècle) ;
mosquée Abou Hanîfa ;
université al-Mustansiriyah (XIIIe siècle) ;
le Khan Mirjan est un édifice de briques construit en 1359 par le gouverneur de Bagdad, Amin ud-Din Mirjan. Il fut conçu pour servir de caravansérail, dont les revenus iraient à la fondation (Waqf) créée pour l'entretien de la Madrasa Mirjaniyya, comme le rappelle l'inscription au-dessus de la porte d'entrée. Le bâtiment de 31,5 m sur 45 possède deux étages disposés autour d'un espace central, dont les voûtes s'élèvent à 14,5 m. Dans les années 1990, le gouvernement irakien procéda à des transformations pour en faire un restaurant ;
madrassa Mirjaniyya (1357) ;

mausolée de Zumurrud Kathun, situé à Karkh, date de 1202. Il a été construit pour abriter la dépouille de la veuve du calife abbasside Al-Mustadhi. On le confond parfois avec la tombe de Zubayda, l'épouse du calife Hâroun ar-Rachîd. Un dôme conique décorné de muqarnas (stalactites), surmonte une base octogonale ;
mosquée al-Rahman (« le Miséricordieux »). Lien GoogleMaps 33°18' 37.79" N 44°20' 55.39" E, dont la construction a débuté sous Saddam Hussein et qui n'a jamais été achevée ;
cathédrale Mar Petros et Paulos ;
gymnase Le Corbusier (XXe siècle) ;
stade Al-Shaab (XXe siècle) ;
monument al-Shaheed (monument des Martyrs de la guerre Iran-Irak, XXe siècle) ;
mains de la victoire (XXe siècle) ;
musée national d'Irak (XXe siècle) ;
zoo de Bagdad. Ouvert en 1971 sous Ahmad Hassan al-Bakr, il s'agit du plus grand zoo du Moyen-Orient, s'étendant sur une superficie de 81 ha. Il héberge aujourd'hui environ 1 070 animaux.

Administration
La ville comporte dix districts administratifs. Chaque district est divisé en quartiers. Il en existe 89 en tout. Le Tigre partage la ville en deux parties :

Rusafa, regroupe les six districts de la rive est :
Rusafa (en)
Adhamiyah
Thawra (« Révolution »), plus connu sous le nom de Sadr City
Tisaa Nissan (« 9 avril », date de la chute de Saddam Hussein en 2003), plus connu sous son ancien nom, Baghdad Al-Jidida, c'est-à-dire Nouveau-Bagdad (en)
Karrada (en) (où se trouve le campus Jadriya de l'université de Bagdad)
Zafraniya (en)
Karkh, rassemble les quatre districts de la rive ouest :
Karkh (en) (avec la zone verte)
Kadhimiya (en)
Mansour (en) (d'après le nom du deuxième calife abbasside)
al-Rashid (en)

Démographie
Du VIIIe au XIIIe siècle Bagdad était la plus grande métropole de son époque. Autour de l’an 900, la population de Bagdad était estimée à environ 1 million d’habitants. En 1900 la population était estimée à 145 000 habitants, 580 000 en 1950. En 1948 40% de la population était juive. En 2001, la population de l'agglomération de Bagdad est estimée à 4 958 000 habitants.

Économie
Bagdad est le centre industriel du pays et son carrefour de communications aériennes, routières et ferroviaires. Douze ponts permettent le franchissement du fleuve Tigre. On y trouve raffineries de pétrole, cultures agricoles, tanneries et autres industries textiles. La ville produit des vêtements, des ustensiles ménagers, des bijoux, des articles de cuir et de feutre et des tapis commercialisés dans les souks (marchés arabes). Ces souks aux allées étroites constitués de petites boutiques et d'étals font partie de l'histoire de la ville et en sont caractéristiques.

Transports
Transports aériens
Bagdad est desservie par un aéroport international situé à environ 20 km au sud-ouest du centre-ville.

Transports ferroviaires
La capitale irakienne est desservie dès 1903 par le train depuis la ville turque de Konya par la ligne baptisée « Chemin de fer Berlin-Bagdad ». La ligne est mise en sommeil depuis la Seconde Guerre mondiale. Actuellement, le train arrive à Bagdad par le nord (Samarra) et par le sud (Kut) à la gare centrale de Bagdad, sur la rive ouest, magnifique bâtiment de style Art déco érigé entre 1947 et 1951 par la firme britannique Wilson & Mason Partners.

Transports urbains
Religion
Jusqu'en 2003 et l'invasion menée par les États-Unis, les chiites, les sunnites et les chrétiens se mêlaient dans de nombreux quartiers de la ville. Après une explosion de violences interconfessionnelles, les quartiers se sont divisés suivant la religion ; les chiites ont accru leur domination. Quant aux chrétiens, leur nombre a reculé de moitié en Irak.[réf. nécessaire]

Violence
Après la chute du régime de Saddam Hussein et l'entrée de l'armée américaine dans la ville, Bagdad connait une montée de violence et la multiplication du nombre des attentats-suicides et les attentats à la voiture piégée.
En 2009, une ONG mexicaine la classe comme la 10e ville la plus dangereuse du monde derrière Baltimore aux États-Unis.
Fin 2010, la violence avait reculé de 90 % par rapport au record de 240 incidents par jour, en 2007. Des explosions ont encore lieu. Les soldats et les policiers doivent désormais suivre une formation pour identifier et désamorcer les explosifs.
En 2015, Bagdad est considérée comme la ville la plus dangereuse du monde avec 380 attaques terroristes en une année.

Sports
Bagdad est le siège des plus grands clubs de football irakiens, Al Qowa Al Jawia, Al Zawra, Al Shorta, Al Talaba. La ville abrite également le stade du Shaab (stade du peuple) inauguré en 1966, le plus grand stade d'Irak avec une capacité de 45 000 personnes ; ce stade fait lui-même face au Gymnase Shaab, dessiné et construit en 1980 selon les plans de Le Corbusier (voir plus haut), et qui abrite le siège de la Fédération nationale irakienne de basket-ball.
La ville présente également un goût prononcé pour les courses hippiques depuis la Première Guerre mondiale, bien que les islamistes aient vainement essayé d'interrompre cette tradition héritée de l'occupation britannique.

Tourisme
Zoo de Bagdad.

Personnalités
Avant 1300
Abu Hanifa, Imam et législateur arabo-sunnite juriste d’une école qui porte son nom l’école Hanafite (vers 699-767) ;
Ahmed Ibn Hanbal Imam et juriste d’une école qui porte son nom  de la 4eme école de jurisprudence sunnite l’école Hanbalite vers (780-?);
Al-Mansur, calife, fondateur de Bagdad en 762 (714-755) ;
Abu al-Atahiyah, poète arabe (748-vers 828) ;
Abu Nuwas al-Hasan Ibn Hani, poète arabe (762-vers 813) ;
Al-Khwârizmî, mathématicien, fondateur de l'algèbre (vers 780-850) ;
Al-Moubarred, grammairien arabe (826-898) ;
Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani, écrivain persan (897-967) ;
Abd Allah Ibn Al-Tayyib philosophe et moine nestorien.

1800-1900
Gertrude Bell (1868-1926), dite Gertrude de Baghdad.

1900-2000
Maruf al-Rusafi (en), intellectuel et poète (1875-1945) ;
Freya Stark (1893-1973) ;
Faiq Hassan (en), peintre, fondateur des Beaux-Arts de Bagdad en 1939 (1914-1992).
Jawad Saleem, peintre et sculpteur (1919-1962) ;
May Kaftan-Kassim (1928-2020), radioastronome ;
Laila Al Shaikhli (1965-) présentatrice et animatrice de télévision ;
Suhail Dabbach (1965-), acteur ;
Dunya Mikhail (née en 1965), poétesse irako-américaine ;
Zainab Salbi (1969-), humanitaire, présentatrice, auteure, fondatrice et ancienne présidente (1993-2011) de l'association Women for Women International, basée à Washington.
Ziad Al-Aajili, appartenant a la famille Al-Aajili et chef de l'Observatoire de la liberté journalistique.
Addai II de Bagdad (1950-2022), Catholicos-Patriarche de l'Ancienne Église de l'Orient.

Jumelages
Amman, Jordanie ;
Beyrouth, Liban ;
Dubai, Émirats arabes unis.

Notes et références
Marie-Nicolas Bouillet  et Alexis Chassang (dir.), « Bagdad » dans Dictionnaire universel d’histoire et de géographie, 1878 (lire sur Wikisource)

Voir aussi
Bibliographie
Caecilia Pieri, Bagdad, la construction d'une capitale moderne, 1914-1960, Presses de l'Ifpo, 2015, 440 pages, près de 800 illustrations  (ISBN 978-2-35159-399-8)  (ISSN 2225-7578).
Mina Marefat, Caecilia Pieri, Gilles Ragot, Le Gymnase de Le Corbusier à Bagdad, 2014, Éditions du patrimoine, collection Regards (versions française et anglaise), Presses de l'Ifpo (édition arabe)  (ISBN 2757703013).
Caecilia Pieri, Baghdad Arts Deco, Architectural Brickwork 1920-1950, American University of Cairo Press, 2009  (ISBN 9789774163562).
(en) Justin Marozzi, Baghdad, City of Peace, City of Blood, Penguin books, 2014.
Reuven Snir, Baghdad ― The City in Verse, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013. Cette anthologie réunit des poèmes composés par des auteurs bédouins, musulmans chrétiens, kurdes et juifs du VIIIe siècle à nos jours et traduits de l'arabe [1].
(en) Richard Coke, Baghdad. The City of Peace, Thornton Butterworth, Ltd, 1935.
(en) Ihsan Fathi, The Architectural heritage of Baghdad, Iraqi Cultural Centre, 1979.
Encyclopédie de l'Islam, Tome I (A-B), Brill, Leyde, 1960.
Dominique Sourdel, L'État impérial des califes abbassides, 1999.
Mgr Jean-Benjamin Sleiman, Dans le piège irakien : Le cri du cœur de l'archevêque de Bagdad  (ISBN 2750902401).
Aymeric Caron, Envoyé spécial à Bagdad pendant la guerre, mars-avril 2003, éditions L'Harmattan, novembre 2003, 246 p.  (ISBN 2-7475-5245-4 et 9782747552455) (OCLC 62089747) (BNF 39098116).
Jean-Louis Dufour, Les crises internationales : De Pékin (1900) à Bagdad (2004)  (ISBN 2804800229).
Jean Reinert, Les amants de Bagdad, Paris, Gallimard, 2006, 120 p. (ISBN 2-07-078117-8).
Caecilia Pieri, Bagdad Arts déco : Architectures de brique 1920-1950, Paris, L’Archange Minotaure, coll. « L'âme du monde », 2008, 151 p., 31 cm (ISBN 978-2-35463-032-4, BNF 41381226, présentation en ligne).
Pierre Marthelot, « Bagdad Notes de géographie urbaine », dans Annales de Géographie, 1965, t. 74, no 401. p. 24-37.

Filmographie
Bagdad, la vie malgré tout, film documentaire de Marie-Ange Poyet et Louis-André Morand, France, 2005, 60 min.

Articles connexes
Musée national d'Irak
Bousculade sur le pont Al-Aïmah
Nous les Irakiens, film documentaire sur la vie quotidienne à Bagdad au moment de la chute de Saddam Hussein.
Liste des agglomérations du Moyen-Orient

Liens externes

Site officiel
Ressource relative à la bande dessinée : Comic Vine 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online 
Ressource relative à l'audiovisuel : France 24 
Ressource relative à la musique : MusicBrainz  

Bagdad vue du ciel sur Google Maps
Bagdad, l'âge d'or

 Portail de l’Irak


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 3,710
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Baghdad
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Baghdad (Arabic: بـغداد Baġdād) is the capital and largest city of Iraq, with an estimated population of 6-7 million. Once one of the greatest centres of learning and culture in the world, Baghdad was the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate during the Islamic Golden Age. It was once a favoured destination on the 'hippie trail' and is packed full of sights.

## History
Founded in 762 CE by caliph al-Mansur as the Round City, Baghdad became the seat of the Abbasid Caliphate and grew into one of the largest scientific centres in the Islamic world during the Golden Age of Islam. Five centuries of peace came to an end in 1258 when the city was destroyed by the Mongols who advanced westwards. After a period of Ottoman rule, Baghdad became the capital of Iraq under a British protectorate and as an independent state. Since then, Baghdad has been subject to war, terrorist attacks and attempts at reconstruction.

## By plane
The national airline is Iraqi Airways[dead link] that operates a growing fleet of more than 30 modern jets. They mainly provide domestic flights but Iraqi Airways also offers flights to numerous international destinations, including a few routes from Europe. Numerous other operators in the Middle East also fly to Baghdad, with daily flights from most regional hubs. There are also a few low cost airlines such as FlyBaghdad that have flights to Baghdad. The best way to travel from Europe is either with Austrian or Turkish Airlines. They operate several direct flights per week from Vienna and daily from Istanbul respectively. For those working for Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in Iraq, there are charter airlines operating into Baghdad.
The frequent sandstorms that hit the area can obscure visibility and cause flights to be turned away. It is not unusual for commercial flights to make it all the way to BIAP, and then turn around and return to their origin due to limited visibility on the runway.
33.26706644.2310971 Baghdad International Airport (مطار بغداد الدولي) (16 km west from the centre of Baghdad). All of the usual airport facilities are available, such as banks, money exchange, ATMs, mobile phone companies, restaurants and even a hotel. The airport has three interlinked terminals. It is easy to walk between the terminals both land side and air side. One terminal is used by Iraqi Airways (the most counter-clockwise one) and the middle one handles all other flights. The food outlets are small and limited air side, so if you have a long wait, it is better to check in and return back through security to use the land side restaurants. When departing, be prepared for some queuing. Entrance to the airport grounds about three or four miles from the airport terminal will require you and your vehicle to wait in line to be searched. Security checkpoints can take from two to three hours to process through. BGW  IATA      (updated Jul 2020)

## By train
Baghdad is the heart of Iraqs' limited railway system. International trains, such as the famous Taurus Express from Istanbul, have been suspended since 2003 and are not likely to return for the foreseeable future. However, there are several domestic services which are useful for tourists. An overnight service connects Baghdad with the southern port city of Basra every night. Both sleeper and couchette classes are available, with price ranging from 10,000 dinars for a couchette to 25,000 dinars for premium sleepers. The train also carries a restaurant car.
There are twice-daily trains from Ramadi via Fallujah and a weekly service from Samarra. Additionally, there are seasonal services from Karbala, mostly during religious festivals.
33.323744.38052 Baghdad Central railway station (محطة بغداد المركزية) (Qahira Street, a kilometre north of city centre, at Damascus Square.). Completed in 1953, Baghdad Central railway station is an architecturally impressive terminus, all trains call here.      (updated May 2024)

## By car
Overland travel is possible from all neighbouring countries and while major roads are generally in an acceptable condition, travelling by car is strongly discouraged due to violence. Baghdad is in the centre of Iraq's highway network, with Freeway 1 from Basra and continuing towards the Jordanian borde being the major thoroughfare. Confusingly, the road from Mosul is named Highway 1.

## By bus
Multiple daily buses arrive from most major Iraqi cities. Long-distance bus services from Istanbul and Ankara restarted in the summer of 2018, with two departures per week. However journey time is a gruelling 30 hours or more. Most long-distance buses arrive at the sprawling 33.3245844.3844773 Al-Alawi bus terminal (گراج العلاوي), next to the central station. Buses leave and arrive from stands both north and south of the Allawi skyway.

## Get around
While the almost daily bombings and shootings have subsided, there is always a risk of getting caught in violence when travelling around the city. Staying vigilant is essential. Many high-end hotels provide their own transport, some even with armoured cars.
Baghdad is served by an extensive but chaotic bus network; maps and route information for the network are not available in English. Taxis are also plentiful and quite cheap to use. Walking is possible in parts of the city, especially in and around the old city. Cycling is not uncommon among locals, but there is next to no infrastructure to support it.

## See
A combination of heavy redevelopment during the second half of the 20th century, two decades of warfare and neglect has not been kind to Baghdad's architectural and cultural heritage. Generally, the eastern side contains the older districts while the western side is newer. The historic old quarter contains a myriad of alleys and small streets with buildings dating back to the Ottoman era or even older. Many of them are unfortunately in various stages of disrepair. The old quarter is also home to the heart and soul of Iraqi literacy  and intellectual community, Mutanabbi Street. The street is lined with bookstores and outdoor book stalls as well as cafés to discuss matters of the day.
33.33845444.3897671 Mustansiriya Madrasah (المدرسة المستنصرية). Often referred to as the Abbasid Palace, this medieval-era scholarly complex was established in 1227 CE. It's one of the oldest buildings still standing in Baghdad and a central landmark in the historic district.      (updated Jul 2020)
33.341244.3862 Qushla building. Ottoman landmark building.   (updated Nov 2020)
33.31467244.3732083 Baghdad Zoo (حديقة حيوانات بغداد). The largest zoo in the country, opened in 1971. It was destroyed in the 2003 war but has quickly recovered. There are, however, few larger mammals to see.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.338644.39254 Khan Murjan (خان مرجان). First built in the 14th century as a caravanserai, an inn for traveling merchants, whose centre was a hall more than 13 metres high.   (updated Sep 2021)
33.31463344.4206755 Firdos Square (ساحة الفردوس). A public open space surrounded by several artwork monuments.

## Museums
33.32833344.3858336 National Museum of Iraq (المتحف العراقي). Covering the history of Mesopotamian culture, this museum housed a huge collection before the Iraq War. Many pieces were looted, but in 2022, the museum was refurbished and reopened.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.34022744.3897747 Baghdadi Museum (المتحف البغدادي) (eastern bank of Tigris, 200 m from Shuhada bridge). History and folklore museum depicting life in Baghdad.      (updated Feb 2017)
33.330844.41118 National Museum of Modern Art (المتحف الوطني للفن الحديث). While much of the rich heritage of modern Iraqi art has been lost or stolen during the recent decades, the Museum of Modern Art still holds an impressive collection.  (updated Dec 2023)
33.354644.39269 Natural History Museum (متحف التاريخ الطبيعي).  (updated Jan 2022)
33.327244.405410 Abdel-Karim Kassem Museum (متحف عبد الكريم قاسم). Small museum dedicated to the leader of the 14 July Revolution, Abdel-Karim Kassem, who overthrew the Iraqi monarchy in 1958.   (updated Jan 2022)
Iraqi Post Museum.  (updated Jan 2022)

## Monuments, memorials and public art
Baghdad is home to many monumental monuments and displays of public art. Many were built during the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein and evoke mixed feelings among locals, while others are universally loved. A large number of high-profile public sculptures were made by Mohammed Ghani Hikmat (1929-2011), nicknamed the sheik of sculptors.
33.30855644.38916711 Monument to the Unknown Soldier (صرح الجندي المجهول). Inspired by the glorification of a martyr from the Iran–Iraq War. The monument represents a traditional shield (dira¹a) dropping from the dying grasp of an Iraqi warrior. The monument used to house a museum which is now mostly empty. Ask the Iraqi soldiers who guard the monument for permission.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.34333344.44611112 Al-Shaheed Monument (نُصب الشهيد) (east side of the Tigris river, near the Army Canal). First built as a monument dedicated to the Iraqi soldiers who died in the Iran-Iraq war. Since the fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003, it has been repurposed to a monument for all Iraqi martyrs including victims of his regime. The monument consists of a circular platform 190 metres in diameter in the centre of an artificial lake. A museum, library, cafeteria, lecture hall, and exhibition gallery are on two levels underneath the domes.      (updated Sep 2021)
33.30555644.38305613 Swords of Qādisīyah (قوس النصر) (inside the Green Zone). A huge pair of triumphal arches celebrating the alleged victory over Iran. Also known as the Hands of Victory. It marks the entrances to a former parade ground.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.3282644.40925214 Freedom Monument (نصب الحرية). Located at the epicenter of Baghdadi civic life, the Tahrir square, this iconic and massive sculpture is one of the city's most well-loved monuments. Completed in 1961, the sculpture spans almost 50 meters in length and features bronze castings depicting the history of Iraq.      (updated Feb 2020)
33.31128244.42400215 Kahramana, Sa'adoon St. Depicting a scene from the legend of Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves, in which the slave girl Marjana outwitted the thieves by tricking them into hiding inside jars over which she poured hot oil.      (updated Jul 2020)
33.31544.367516 Save Iraqi culture monument (نصب انقاذ الثقافة). Built in 2010, meant to remind Iraqis on the fragility of its cultural heritage.   (updated Dec 2020)
33.345944.369217 Ashaar Baghdad. Dedicated to the poetry of Baghdad.   (updated Feb 2021)
33.3544244.3864818 North Gate War Cemetery. A Commonwealth War Graves cemetery, commemorating military personnel killed in Iraq during World War I and World War II.   (updated Nov 2021)

## Mosques
33.37209144.35840919 Abu Hanifa Mosque. One of Baghdad's most prominent Sunni mosques, it surrounds the tomb of Abu Hanifa, the founder of the Hanafi school of Islamic jurisprudence.      (updated Mar 2021)
33.3844.33813920 Al-Kadhimiya Mosque (الحضرة الكاظمية) (northwest of Baghdad). One of the most important Shi'ite religious sites in Iraq. It was finished in 1515 and the 7th Musa ibn Jafar al-Kathim and the 9th Imams Mohammed Al-Jawad were buried there.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.37768444.37345421 Al-Asifyah Mosque. A complex of mosque, madrasa with school buildings, old courts and other former government buildings, and a palace. Together they form a complex that is a tentative UNESCO World Heritage Site.      (updated Aug 2020)
33.33886744.39771622 Al-Khulafa Mosque. Oldest mosque in Baghdad with parts dating back to 902 AD.      (updated Aug 2020)
33.339244.388523 Al-Wazeer Mosque. Built in the 1660s.   (updated Dec 2021)
33.341744.386724 Al-Sarai Mosque (جامع السراي). Sunni mosque completed in 1293 AD.   (updated Oct 2024)
33.35094444.36102825 Buratha Mosque. Historic mosque complex, with some parts previously used as a Christian monastery.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.34254544.38942326 Haydar-Khana Mosque. Considered one of the finest examples of the Ottoman constructions in Baghdad.   (updated Dec 2021)
33.33777844.29638927 Umm al-Qura Mosque (جامع أم القرى). A mosque built to commemorate the "victory" in the 1991 Gulf War, the minarets are shaped like barrels of guns and SCUD missiles.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.33162644.37289328 Zumurrud Khatun Mosque and Mausoleum (southeastern end of Sheikh Maarouf Cemetery). Historic mosque and shrine, dating back to the Abbasid era.      (updated Jul 2020)
33.3364544.4079929 Mausoleum of Abdul Qadir Gilani. Mosque and mausoleum dedicated to Abdul Qadir Gilani, an 11th century mystic who was the founded of the Qadiriyya Sufi Order.      (updated Nov 2021)
33.35055644.40194430 Mausoleum of Umar Suhrawardi. A historic complex of a mausoleum and a mosque dating back to the Abbasid era and is dedicated to Shahab al-Din Abu Hafs Umar Suhrawardi, the founder of Suhrawardiyya Sufi Order.   (updated Nov 2021)
33.346344.383331 Uzbek Mosque (جامع الأزبك). Historic mosque built by Uzbek immigrants during the 17th century.   (updated Oct 2024)
33.32370544.38356832 Ibn Bunnieh Mosque (جامع ابن بنيه).   (updated Oct 2024)

## Churches
33.33813944.39552833 Cathedral of Our Lady of Sorrows. Built in 1898, it is the seat of the Chaldean Catholic Patriarchate of Babylon.      (updated Feb 2020)
33.30938644.4347534 St. Joseph's Cathedral (كاتدرائية القديس يوسف). Seat of the Archdiocese of Baghdad, the current building dates back to 1866.      (updated Feb 2020)
33.30694444.42583335 Sayidat al-Nejat Cathedral (كاتدرائية سيدة النجاة). The main Syriac Catholic Church in Baghdad. Constructed in 1968, in a striking modernist style.   (updated Nov 2020)
33.33010844.41434436 St. Gregory the Great Armenian Church (كنيسة غريغور الأرمنية).   (updated Jan 2022)
33.326544.395437 St George's Church. Anglican church, built in 1936.    (updated Jan 2024)

## Synagogues and Jewish heritage
Iraq was home to a large Jewish population until the early 1950s. Many left for Israel, often forcefully displaced by the government. Today, only fragments remain of Baghdad's Jewish heritage and there's a handful of Jews residing in the city.
33.341344.396438 Great Synagogue of Baghdad. Formerly the main synagogue in Baghdad, now abandoned and neglected. Said to be built on the site of a former synagogue, built by King Jeconiah, who was exiled from the Land of Israel to Babylon, in 597 BCE.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.32255744.41686139 Meir Taweig Synagogue. Only remaining active synagogue. Small and unassuming, visits have to be booked beforehand.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.336144.364240 Tomb of Joshua the High Priest. One of several tombs claiming to be the tomb of Joshua, the first High Priest at the reconstruction of the Jewish Temple after the return of the Jews from the Babylonian Captivity around 500 BCE.    (updated Oct 2024)
33.364244.459141 Al-Habibiyah Jewish Cemetery (In Sadr City). With the historic Jewish cemetery in central Baghdad destroyed, this is where most Jewish graves have been relocated to.      (updated Oct 2024)

## Other religious sites
33.33618844.36393742 Baba Nanak Shrine (مقام بابا نانك). Ruins of a Sikh gurdwara, house of worship, and shrine dedicated to Baba Nanak who was the founder of Sikhism and visited Baghdad in the 16th century. Little remains of the shrine but remains a popular place to visit for Indian Sikhs who comes to Baghdad.   (updated Oct 2024)
33.28172444.35853143 Sabian Mandi of Baghdad. A mandaean temple.   (updated Oct 2024)

## Palaces and landmarks
During the reign of Saddam Hussein, a large number of palaces were built. While not tourist sites per se, they can be of interest to the intrepid traveller. Many are in various states of disrepair and might not be open to the public.
33.28361144.25611144 Al-Faw Palace (قصر الفاو). Also known as the Water Palace for its site beside the Tigris River. Used as a military base for US troops      (updated Dec 2017)
33.30084844.36133445 As-Salam Palace. Home of former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein.   (updated Oct 2020)
33.30416744.40861146 Republican Palace (القصر الجمهوري). Commissioned by King Faisal II in the 1950s as the new principal Royal residence. The palace serves as a key government building and can only be seen from outside.   (updated Oct 2020)
33.30258344.37547 Baghdad Clock. Landmark building with a striking large clock at the top.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.30333344.35416748 Baghdad Tower (برج بغداد). A 205 m (673 ft) TV tower. Was known in Ba'athist times as the International Saddam tower and is one of the tallest towers in Iraq. There's an observation deck at the top, which has been open intermittently.   (updated Dec 2021)
33.28897244.384549 Central Bank of Iraq Tower (برج البنك المركزي العراقي). Designed by Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid, this 37 story tower is set to become one of the most striking landmarks when completed in 2023.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.351844.404150 Bab al-Wastani (باب الوسطاني). Last remaining part of the historic Baghdad city wall.    (updated Jan 2022)
33.365544.357851 Iraq Royal Cemetery. Mausoleum of the former royal family, King Faisal I (1883-1933), King Ghazi (1912-1939) and King Faisal II (1935-1958) are buried here.   (updated Jul 2022)

## Archaeological sites
33.3537244.2022952 Dur-Kurigalzu. Situated along an east-west-trending limestone ridge between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, the town of Dur Kurigalzu was founded by the Kassite King Kurigalzu I in the late 15th or early 14th century BC. Today, the ruins contains among other a well-preserved ziggurat.   (updated Nov 2020)
33.36666744.46666753 Shaduppum. Also known as Tell Harmal. The site has been occupied at least between 2100 BC and 1700 BC. Several artifacts from the site can be found in the Iraqi museums.   (updated Nov 2020)

## Do
33.30361144.4322221 Iraqi National Theatre (المسرح الوطني العراقي).   (updated Dec 2021)
33.441744.34352 Baghdad Island Park (جزيرة بغداد السياحية) (12 km north of central Baghdad). Large outdoor amusement park with swimming pools, restaurants, cafés and an observation tower.  (updated Jul 2022)

## Work
There are several ways to work in Iraq as a foreigner. For US citizens the most obvious is the US Army, which still maintains personnel here. Next are the government contractors, such as the construction company KBR[dead link]. Many contractors hire personnel with prior military experience to return to Iraq. Persons with military experience or who are fluent in Arabic are especially sought after. Lastly, there are civilian government agencies in Iraq. USAID  send their own personnel as well as contractors to Iraq.
The agencies above are all relevant for US citizens. Citizens of other countries with a presence in Iraq can apply for work through the respective agencies in their home country.

## Buy
Rugs and DVDs are available to buy. Inspect the quality of rugs carefully: Some are cheap Chinese-made rugs, and many are extremely overpriced. Also, many DVDs, especially those from street vendors, are bootlegs of varying quality.
33.31194444.3647221 Baghdad Mall (بغداد مول). Large upscale shopping mall in Baghdad, with both shops and restaurants.   (updated Jan 2022)

## Traditional markets
Baghdad is home to several traditional markets with vendors that both produce and sell their goods at the same market. One traditional art is coppersmithing with the Baghdad copper souk producing some of the finest copper artifacts in the world. However it and several other traditional crafts are in decline due to cheaper imported goods.
33.33999944.391762 Coppersmith souk (Souk al-Safafeer, سوق الصفافير).   (updated Dec 2023)

## Eat
Restaurants and cafés have been notorious targets for suicide bombers in the past, making eating out a quite dangerous activity.

## Mid-range
33.2594544.2333321 Baghdad International Airport Hotel (فندق مطار بغداد الدولي). A standard business hotel, but with quite a hefty price. On secure grounds at the airport and often used by people visiting on business. USD225 for a standard room, lower rates when staying longer.    (updated Jul 2020)
33.30079744.4200142 Inter Hotel, Abu Nawas St, ☏ +964 780 926 2844.    (updated Jul 2020)

## Splurge
33.29119544.3902523 Babylon Rotana Baghdad Hotel, Karrada St, ☏ +964 7 505 223 333.      (updated Jul 2020)
33.28266744.3940564 Coral Baghdad Hotel, Corner of Jamia St and Mohammed Ismail Ezzat St, in Jadriyah District, ☏ +964 781 440 0000, info@coral-hotelbaghdad.com. An upstart hotel that has quickly become one of the most popular higher-end hotels in Baghdad. USD215+.    (updated Jul 2016)
33.31387144.4188665 Cristal Grand Ishtar Hotel, Saadoun St, ☏ +964 770 6770711. A hotel in central Baghdad. USD50+.      (updated Nov 2018)
33.29947444.4333886 Qaser Al-Masbah Hotel (at Masbah Crossing in Karada district), ☏ +964 783 403 8087, masbahplazahotel@yahoo.com. Luxury hotel, restaurant on site. Free Wi-Fi.    (updated Feb 2017)

## Drink
While Baghdad is undergoing something of a liberalization regarding both night life and alcohol, it is still not widely available and large parts of society frowns upon it. While some bars exists, particularly along Abu Nawas Street, a safe bet is always the bars of the top tier hotels. Many international organisations have their own bars as well, and some are open to outsiders.
Tea houses and cafés are however ubiquitous, and often open late into the night.
33.340144.38821 Shahbandar Café, Mutanabbi St. The oldest operating tea house in Baghdad, established in 1907. A hub to discuss matters of the day over a cup of tea.      (updated Sep 2021)

## Sleep
Most organizations arrange their own accommodation. Sleeping in hotels in the proper city is always a risk due to bombings.

## Stay safe
Travel to Baghdad is not recommended because of security concerns. Westerners are particular targets of kidnapping and assassination by militant and extremist groups. Baghdad airport is secure, so transiting there if necessary is safe. See the warning on the Iraq article.
The easiest way to stay safe in Baghdad is not to go there in the first place, except for official reasons. Most expats and business travellers to Iraq hire a security detail, which constantly monitors the security situation within Iraq and around Baghdad. Travel outside the International Zone is extremely dangerous. Roadside and car bombs are detonated every day in Baghdad. Many Iraqis are armed. Markets and popular gathering places are frequent targets of bombers. As a foreigner you are more likely to be targeted for kidnapping. Kidnappings are often financially motivated. These threats are not restricted to Americans or women.

## Heatwaves
Baghdad is prone to heatwaves, with temperatures exceeding 50 °C (122 °F) during July and August. Making the situation worse, frequent electrical outages means that even where there is air conditioning it might not work. Being prepared and staying hydrated is essential.

## Embassies
Australia, Haifa Street, next to Ibn Sina Hospital, International Zone, Baghdad, Iraq, ☏ +964 780 923 7565, info.baghdad@dfat.gov.au.
Canada, British Embassy Compound, International Zone, ☏ +964 782 783 5084, BGHDD.Consular@international.gc.ca.
China, P.O.Box 2386，Al-jadryaa Post Office, ☏ +964 790 191 2315, chinaemb_iq@mfa.gov.cn.
Greece, Hay Babil, AL-Jadriyah Sector 913, Rd. 31/ Built 63, ☏ +964 1 778 2273, +964 790 364 2046 (Emergencies), fax: +870-763262272, gremb.bag@mfa.gr.
Romania, Mahalla 601, Zuqaq 15, no. C45, Al-Mansur Street, ☏ +964 780 446 2039, +964 0780 568 1943, fax: +964 1 778-04-89, bagdad@mae.ro. Embassy
Serbia, Jadriya Babil District Mahala 923, ZUKAK 35, Bldg 16, ☏ +964 1 778-78-87, fax: +964 1 778-04-89.
United Kingdom, International Zone, ☏ +44 1908 516666, Baghdad.consularenquiries@fco.gov.uk.
33.29864244.3956781 United States, Al-Kindi St, International Zone. Su-Th 08:00-16:30.

## Go next
Basra — second largest city in Iraq and its main port city
Mosul — third largest city in Iraq
Assur and Hatra — archaeological sites from the Cradle of Civilization
Ctesiphon — archaeological sites just south of Baghdad



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ABBASID PALACE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: historical_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:32:47


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,700
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abbasid_Palace
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Abbasid Palace (Arabic: القصر العباسي, romanized: Al-Qasr al-Abbasi) is an ancient Abbasid complex and an Iraqi historical palace located near the Tigris river on al-Rusafa side of Baghdad, Iraq. North of al-Mutanabbi Street and a part of al-Maidan area. The palace dates back to the late 12th or early 13th century. It was most likely built by the Abbasid caliph al-Nasir (although this is disputed) and was used as a walkable and observant fort for the Caliph. The Abbasid Palace is one of the few remaining examples of Abbasid-era buildings in Baghdad along with al-Mustansiriyya Madrasa and others. After falling into ruin, it was heavily reconstructed during the 20th century.
The Abbasid Palace is considered one of the most important archaeological buildings in Baghdad due to its age and Islamic architecture. The area in which the palace is located in, as well as the palace itself, are a part of a tentative UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Background
The palace was said to be built under the reign of Abbasid Caliph al-Nasir and includes special examples of Islamic architecture and façade of that time. During the early 20th-century, the German archeologist Ernst Herzfeld would examine the complex for the first time. At the time, he referred to it as "Iwan al-Qal'ah" since the only remains of the complex are the large gate and the courtyard with vague inscriptions. Several excavation and restoration missions would then materialize over the complex between 1933 and 1970. But the palace was left mostly untouched until 1980 under the leadership of former president Saddam Hussein when the palace was restored to its current form and also served as the headquarters for the former Iraqi House of Culture and Arts.

Debate on the building's origins
During the many episodes of archeology, restoration, and excavations, many discoveries were made such as the northern side of the courtyard is occupied by a structure that is topped by six domes suggesting Ottoman-like features. But no epigraphic evidence was found to suggest this was a caliph's palace or to back up its origins in general.
Due to this, researchers and historians studying the complex gave it many names according to their opinions and research. It was first called Iwan al-Qal'ah or the Palace of the Castle. They also debated on which of the Abbasid palaces this one was if it was one. Some historians, including Iraqi historians Mustafa Jawad and Ya'qub Sarkis, supported the idea that it was the palace of caliph al-Nasir, relying on historical and schematic evidence, including what Andalusian traveler Ibn Jubayr mentioned on his trip to Baghdad where he reported seeing Caliph al-Nasir as he descended with his boat to his palace at the top of the eastern side on the Tigris River's shore. This matches with the location of the palace as it is at the top of the eastern side along with the old wall of Baghdad that still has its foundations remaining in the wall of the palace. Al-Nasir demolished the walls and built this palace in its place between 1180 and 1184. The architecture of the complex is also an important factor as it mirrors the architecture of another Abbasid structure, al-Mustansiriyya Madrasa. Factors such as the gate, the iwans, and the structure suggest it dates back to the Abbasid Caliphate. Traditionally, its considered a place where the caliph would meet dignitaries and visitors.
Although it was also argued that the palace may belong to Caliph al-Mustansir or that the building was a madrasa called "al-Sharabiyya Madrasa" instead of an Abbasid caliph's palace. Many scholars have rejected the idea that this complex was intended to be a palace. Suggesting that it was the Sharabiyya Madrasa, or at the very least a madrasa, instead due to its architectural similarities to the Mustansiriyya Madrasa. Mainly, the architecture and the two levels contain side rooms that are large enough to be classrooms and house students. Despite arguments that the complex was allegedly a madrasa, there is also evidence that challenges this perspective. The historical sources suggest that the complex's location was home to the old Baghdad citadel and historically has been an administration center. Furthermore, historical sources have been silent on the alleged madrasa and that medieval complexes often share typological features. Therefore, it has been agreed that the complex may have been at least an Abbasid palace.

Recent history
By the early 20th century the building was partly ruined. Significant parts of it were reconstructed between (approximately) 1933 and 1971 by the Iraqi Directorate of Antiquities. Excavations were also carried out during this period to uncover missing parts of the building. The exterior main entrance on the southwestern side of the building is a product of this reconstruction, while the vestibule to which it leads has been well preserved. In the courtyard, the main iwan was restored while some of the arcaded façades around it and two other sides of the courtyard were rebuilt.
In May 2018, a ceremony was held inside the Abbasid Palace that included poetry readings accompanied by playing the oud, followed by the playing of Sufi compositions by a band, maqam songs from the Iraqi heritage, a plastic art exhibition and a folklore bazaar that included accessories, handmade carpets and handicrafts. The event saw a crowded and diverse audience and also the supervision of the Director General of the Department of Public Cultural Relations, Falah Hassan Shaker. This event also gave two main messages. The first is sending a message to the world that Iraqis are proud of their heritage and civilization, with everyone participating in reviving the occasion, and the other message was aimed towards the Iraqi government with the need to pay attention to Iraqi archaeological sites and heritage buildings. The supervisor of the Baghdad file, the City of Literary Creativity, Dr. Sadiq Rahma, praised the event, saying, “The Abbasid Palace is a new creative space in which we can hold future activities, and the activity of the Department of Cultural Relations today is one of the best cultural activities, especially after its rehabilitation, which was completely neglected.”
In May 2024, a wedding took place in the Abbasid Palace. The wedding included 50 guests and a band that played traditional Iraqi music. Areej Fadhil chose this location for her wedding due to her love for the complex and was inspired by other couples around the world who had their weddings at heritage locations. Despite this, the decision to open the palace to such events by authorities ignited debates across Iraq about the misuse of heritage sites and the history of such sites, including recent neglect and looting of heritage landmarks.

Architecture
Gate
The gate of the complex is located on the western side of the building which faces the Tigris River and leads to the rectangular courtyard. The gate to the palace consists of an altar with a roof decorated with carvings and benches designated for guards and servants. It is the entrance to the palace and the altar to the side of the grand palace. It is more than 21 meters long and is surrounded by two niches in the form of a large, full circle, and is engraved with Qur’anic verses. It is recognized as one of the largest heritage Abbasid arches in Baghdad in the ornate Islamic architectural style.

Layout and features
The palace is notable for its special architectural carving style in Islamic architecture which is similar to that of al-Mustansiriya Madrasa. Inside the complex is a rectangular courtyard with a large fountain in the middle, the courtyard is distinguished by brick decorations of different sizes and shapes. Surrounded by the courtyard are corridors and vestibules each of which is more than 26 meters long and more than nine meters high. The corridors contain muqarnas and open up to the courtyard through pointed arches.
The bricked arches and iwans of the palace include vaulted recesses and are filled with carved geometric decorations. Specifically the eastern corridor contains a vault that consists of a series of interlocked muqarnas that appear like a corbelled cell. The muqarnas appear through the iwans and end each in an eight-pointed star. Although vaulted muqarnas have already become a widespread feature of Islamic architecture by the 13th century, the muqarnas in the palace feature unique inscriptions and ornaments.

Entering the palace, one can feel cold air surrounding them, this is because the building was designed to be cool in the summer and warm in the winter. The bricks of the building that were used for walls and ceilings were exposed to high temperatures so that they can be more durable and solid. Decorative bricks were exposed to medium and light temperatures so that the sculptor and engineer could make decorations and sculptures out of them. The walls of the building are thick which made the palace fortified and durable. The ground floor includes 18 rooms while the second floor contains 22. Among the rooms is an iwan, madrasa rooms, and a prayer mosque. Parts of the complex are also decorated with arabesque motifs which originated in Baghdad.Similar to the Mustansiriyya Madrasa, the center of the complex contains a courtyard shaped like a square. The eastern side is dominated by a massive iwan that leads to the gate that is undoubtedly the main gate to the entire complex. The massive keel-like shaped iwan is double-sized compared to the rest of the iwans that surround the courtyard and are arranged on two levels. Facing the massive iwan is a specious rectangular room which has been interpreted as a mosque area. Although the alleged mosque's room is flawed. Particularly, the room includes incorrect orientation to the Qibla by around 30 degrees. As well as lack of a mihrab and Qu'ranic inscriptions.

See also
Abbasid architecture
Al-Khulafa Mosque
Al-Mustansiriyya Madrasa

Notes
References
Works cited
Al-Janabi, Tariq Jawad (1975). Studies In Mediaeval Iraqi Architecture (Ph.D. thesis). Edinburgh University.
Anastasio, Stefano (6 April 2023). Mesopotamia, Syria, and Transjordan in the Archibald Creswell Photograph Collection of the Biblioteca Berenson. Archaeopress Publishing Ltd. ISBN 9781803274560.
Tabbaa, Yasser (2017). "The Resurgence of the Baghdad Caliphate". In Flood, Finbarr Barry; Necipoğlu, Gülru (eds.). A Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture. Wiley Blackwell. pp. 307–326. ISBN 9781119068662.


== External links ==



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
BABYLON
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:33:03


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 7,282
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babylon
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Babylon ( BAB-il-on) was an ancient city located on the lower Euphrates river in southern Mesopotamia, within modern-day Hillah, Iraq, about 85 kilometres (53 miles) south of modern-day Baghdad. Babylon functioned as the main cultural and political centre of the Akkadian-speaking region of Babylonia. Its rulers established two important empires in antiquity, the 19th–16th century BC Old Babylonian Empire, and the 7th–6th century BC Neo-Babylonian Empire. Babylon was also used as a regional capital of other empires, such as the Achaemenid Empire. Babylon was one of the most important urban centres of the ancient Near East, until its decline during the Hellenistic period. Nearby ancient sites are Kish, Borsippa, Dilbat, and Kutha.
The earliest known mention of Babylon as a small town appears on a clay tablet from the reign of Shar-Kali-Sharri (2217–2193 BC), of the Akkadian Empire. Babylon was merely a religious and cultural centre at this point and was neither an independent state nor a large city. Instead, it was subject to the Akkadian Empire. After the collapse of the Akkadian Empire, the south Mesopotamian region was dominated by the Gutian Dynasty for a few decades, before the rise of the Third Dynasty of Ur, which encompassed the whole of Mesopotamia, including the town of Babylon.
The town became part of a small independent city-state with the rise of the first Babylonian Empire, now known as the Old Babylonian Empire, in the early second millennium BC. The Amorite king Hammurabi founded the short-lived Old Babylonian Empire in the 18th century BC. He built Babylon into a major city and declared himself its king. Southern Mesopotamia became known as Babylonia, and Babylon eclipsed Nippur as the region's holy city. The empire waned under Hammurabi's son Samsu-iluna, and Babylon spent long periods under Assyrian, Kassite and Elamite domination. After the Assyrians destroyed and then rebuilt it, Babylon became the capital of the short-lived Neo-Babylonian Empire, from 626 to 539 BC. Both the Hanging Gardens of Babylon and Walls of Babylon were ranked among the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, with the former allegedly existing between approximately 600 BC and AD 1. However, there are questions about whether the Hanging Gardens of Babylon even existed, as there is no mention within any extant Babylonian texts of its existence. After the fall of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, the city came under the rule of the Achaemenid, Seleucid, Parthian, Roman, Sassanid, and Muslim empires. The last known habitation of the town dates from the 11th century, when it was referred to as the "small village of Babel".
It has been estimated that Babylon was the largest city in the world c. 1770 – c. 1670 BC, and again c. 612 – c. 320 BC. It was perhaps the first city to reach a population above 200,000. Estimates for the maximum extent of its area range from 890 (3½ sq. mi.) to 900 ha (2,200 acres). The main sources of information about Babylon—excavation of the site itself, references in cuneiform texts found elsewhere in Mesopotamia, references in the Bible, descriptions in other classical writing, especially by Herodotus, and second-hand descriptions, citing the work of Ctesias and Berossus—present an incomplete and sometimes contradictory picture of the ancient city, even at its peak in the sixth century BC. UNESCO inscribed Babylon as a World Heritage Site in 2019. The site receives thousands of visitors each year, almost all of whom are Iraqis. Construction is rapidly increasing, which has caused encroachments upon the ruins.
Babylon stopped functioning as an urban centre between the 2nd century BC and the 7th century CE. Over those 700 years, it gradually declined from a major city to near-total abandonment. Small communities have continued to live in the area, and nearby towns such as Hillah remain inhabited on the historical site.

Names
The spelling Babylon is the Latin representation of Koine Greek Babylṓn (Βαβυλών), derived from the native Akkadian: 𒆍𒀭𒊏𒆠, romanized: Bābilim, lit. 'gate of the god(s)'. The cuneiform spelling is KÁ.DIG̃IR.RAKI,  corresponding to the Sumerian phrase Kan dig̃irak.
The sign 𒆍 (KÁ) is the logogram for "gate", 𒀭 (DIG̃IR) means "god", and 𒊏 (RA) represents the coda of the word dig̃ir (-r) followed by the genitive suffix -ak. The final 𒆠 (KI) is a determinative indicating that the previous signs are to be understood as a place name.
Archibald Sayce, writing in the 1870s, postulated that the Semitic name was a loan-translation of the original Sumerian name. However, the "gate of god" interpretation is increasingly viewed as a Semitic folk etymology to explain an unknown original non-Semitic placename. I. J. Gelb in 1955 argued that the original name was Babilla, of unknown meaning and origin, as there were other similarly named places in Sumer, and there are no other examples of Sumerian place-names being replaced with Akkadian translations. He deduced that it later transformed into Akkadian Bāb-ili(m), and that the Sumerian name Kan-dig̃irak was a loan translation of the Semitic folk etymology rather than the original name. The retranslation of the Semitic name into Sumerian would have taken place at the time of the "Neo-Sumerian" Third Dynasty of Ur. (Bab-Il).

A fragmentary limestone votive inscription dated by paleography to the Early Dynastic II period (c. c. 2700 BC) was suggested to include the name of Babylon. It read "en5-[si] BAR.KI.BAR dumu a-hu-ì-lum ̆lu-ì-lum-be-l[í] lú-ur-kù-bí dím é damar-utu mu-gub-am6". Proposed as being in the Akkadian language though earlier than that language is attested, it refers to an unknown lord who was the governor (ENSI) of BAR.KI.BAR who constructed a temple for (possibly) Marduk, suggesting that the city might be Babylon. During the ED III period, sign placement was relatively fluid and so the KI sign could be seen as the determinative, with the name of the city as BAR.BAR, perhaps pronounced Babbar. Paul-Alain Beaulieu proposes that the original name could mean "shining" "glowing" or "white". It would be likely that it was later read as Babbir, and then Babbil by swapping the consonant r with l. The attribution to Marduk and to Babylon is considered doubtful.
The earliest reasonably firm mention of the city of Babylon comes from one of Shar-Kali-Sharri's year names, which reports the founding of temples of Annunitum and Ilaba in KÁ.DINGIRki, thought to be Babylon, indicating that the folk etymology was already widely known in the Akkadian Empire (c. 2334–2193 BC) period. However, the original form of the name (Babbar/Babbir) was not forgotten, as seen from the phonetic spelling ba-ab-bí-lum in the Ur III period, and the spellings Pambalu and Babalu in the Kassite period.
Another attested spelling for the city of Babylon is TIN.TIR.KI, attested sparsely in the Old Babylonian period, known mostly from later Neo-Babylonian copies, and was in widespread usage in the 1st Millennium BC. The spelling E.KI also appears in the 1st Millennium BC.
In the Hebrew Bible, the name appears as Babel (Hebrew: בָּבֶל, romanized: Bāḇel; Classical Syriac: ܒܒܠ, romanized: Bāḇēl, Imperial Aramaic: בבל Bāḇel; in Arabic: بَابِل Bābil), interpreted in Genesis 11:9 to mean "confusion", from the verb bilbél (בלבל, "to confuse"). The modern English verb, to babble ("to speak foolish, excited, or confusing talk"), is popularly thought to derive from this name but there is no direct connection.
In some instances, ancient records use "Babylon" as a name for other cities, including Borsippa within Babylon's sphere of influence, and Nineveh for a brief period after the Assyrian sack of Babylon.

Archaeology
The site covers an area of about 1,000 hectares (3+3⁄4 sq mi), with about 450 hectares (1+3⁄4 sq mi) within the several kilometer (mile) long city walls, containing a number of mounds, the most prominent of which are Kasr, Merkes (13 meters; 43 ft above the plain), Homera, Ishin-Aswad, Sahn, Amran, and Babil. It is roughly bisected by the Shatt Al-Hillah, a branch of the Euphrates river, which has shifted slightly since ancient times. The local water table has risen, making excavation of lower levels difficult. Prior to the heavy use of baked bricks in the reign of Neo-Babylonian ruler Nebuchadnezzar II (605–562 BC), construction at Babylon was primarily of unbaked brick, with the occasional use of baked bricks or bitumen.

Kasr – also called Palace or Castle, it was the location of the Neo-Babylonian ziggurat Etemenanki of Nebuchadnezzar II. It lies in the center of the site and rises to 19 meters (62 ft) above the plain.
Amran Ibn Ali – about 22 meters (72 ft) high and at the south of the site. It is the site of Esagila, a temple of Marduk that also contained shrines to Ea and Nabu.
Homera – a reddish-colored mound on the west side. Most of the Hellenistic remains are here. Most of the remains of the ziggurat Etemenanki were heaped here when it was demolished by Alexander the Great in 331 BC.
Babil – a mound about 25 meters (82 ft) high at the northern end of the site. Its bricks have been subject to looting since ancient times. It held a palace built by Nebuchadnezzar.
Subsequent excavation, looting, and reconstruction have reduced these original heights found by the German excavators.

Excavations
Claudius Rich, working for the British East India Company in Baghdad, excavated Babylon in 1811–12 and again in 1817. Captain Robert Mignan explored the site briefly in 1827. In 1829, he completed a map of Babylon which includes the location of several villages. William Loftus visited there in 1849. Austen Henry Layard made some soundings during a brief visit in 1850 before abandoning the site.

Fulgence Fresnel, Julius Oppert and Felix Thomas heavily excavated Babylon from 1852 to 1854. Much of their work was lost in the Qurnah Disaster, when a transport ship and four rafts sank on the Tigris river in May 1855. They had been carrying over 200 crates of artifacts from various excavation missions, when they were attacked by Tigris river pirates near Al-Qurnah. Recovery efforts, assisted by the Ottoman authorities and British Residence in Baghdad, loaded the equivalent of 80 crates on a ship for Le Havre in May 1856. Few antiquities from the Fresnel mission made it to France. Subsequent efforts to recover the lost antiquities from the Tigris, including a Japanese expedition in 1971–72, have been largely unsuccessful.

Henry Rawlinson and George Smith worked there briefly in 1854. The next excavation was conducted by Hormuzd Rassam on behalf of the British Museum. Work began in 1879, continuing until 1882, and was prompted by widespread looting of the site. Using industrial scale digging in search of artifacts, Rassam recovered a large quantity of cuneiform tablets and other finds. The zealous excavation methods, common at the time, caused significant damage to the archaeological context. Many tablets had appeared on the market in 1876 before Rassam's excavation began.

A team from the German Oriental Society led by Robert Koldewey conducted the first scientific archaeological excavations at Babylon. The work was conducted daily from 1899 until 1917. A major problem for Koldewey was the large scale mining of baked bricks, which began in the 19th century and which were mainly sourced from the time of Nebuchadnezzar II. At the time, excavations for brick mining, for various building projects, including the Hindiya dam were under way. The primary efforts of the dig involved the temple of Marduk and the processional way leading up to it, as well as the city wall.
Artifacts, including pieces of the Ishtar Gate and hundreds of recovered tablets, were sent back to Germany, where Koldewey's colleague Walter Andrae reconstructed them into displays at the Vorderasiatisches Museum Berlin. The Koldewey expedition recovered artifacts from the Old Babylonian period. These included 967 clay tablets, with 564 tablets from the Middle Babylonian period, stored in private houses, with Sumerian literature and lexical documents. The German archaeologists fled before oncoming British troops in 1917, and again, many objects went missing in the following years.
Further work by the German Archaeological Institute was conducted by Heinrich J. Lenzen in 1956 and Hansjörg Schmid in 1962, working the Hellenistic, Parthian, Sasanian, and Arabic levels of the site. Lenzen's work dealt primarily with the Hellenistic theatre, and Schmid focused on the temple ziggurat Etemenanki.
A topographical survey at the site was conducted in 1974, followed in 1977 by a review of the stratigraphical position of the main monuments and reconsideration of ancient water levels, by the Turin Centre for Archaeological Research and Excavations in the Middle East and Asia, and the Iraqi-Italian Institute of Archaeological Sciences. The focus was on clearing up issues raised by re-examination of the old German data. Additional work in 1987–1989 concentrated on the area surrounding the Ishara and Ninurta temples in the Shu-Anna city-quarter of Babylon.
A number of Iraqi excavations have occurred at Babylon, the earliest in 1938. From 1979 to 1981 excavation and restoration work was conducted at the Ninmah Temple, Istar Temple, and the Southern Palace. Occasional excavations and restorations continued in the 1970s and 1980s.
During the restoration efforts in Babylon, the Iraqi State Organization for Antiquities and Heritage conducted extensive research, excavation and clearing, but wider publication of these archaeological activities has been limited. Most of the known tablets from all modern excavations remain unpublished.

Sources
The main sources of information about Babylon—excavation of the site itself, references in cuneiform texts found elsewhere in Mesopotamia, references in the Bible, descriptions in other classical writing, especially by Herodotus, and second-hand descriptions citing the work of Ctesias and Berossus—present an incomplete and sometimes contradictory picture of the ancient city, even at its peak in the sixth century BC. Babylon was described, perhaps even visited, by a number of classical historians including Ctesias, Herodotus, Quintus Curtius Rufus, Strabo, and Cleitarchus. These reports are of variable accuracy and some of the content was politically motivated, but these still provide useful information.
Historical knowledge of early Babylon must be pieced together from epigraphic remains found elsewhere, such as at Uruk, Nippur, Sippar, Mari, and Haradum.

Early references
The earliest known mention of Babylon as a small town appears on a clay tablet from the reign of Shar-Kali-Sharri (2217–2193 BC) of the Akkadian Empire. References to the city of Babylon can be found in Akkadian and Sumerian literature from the late third millennium BC. One of the earliest is a tablet describing the Akkadian king Šar-kali-šarri laying the foundations in Babylon of new temples for Annūnı̄tum and Ilaba. Babylon also appears in the administrative records of the Third Dynasty of Ur, which collected in-kind tax payments and appointed an ensi as local governor.
The so-called Weidner Chronicle (also known as ABC 19) states that Sargon of Akkad, c. 23rd century BC in the short chronology, had built Babylon "in front of Akkad" (ABC 19:51). A later chronicle states that Sargon "dug up the dirt of the pit of Babylon, and made a counterpart of Babylon next to Akkad". (ABC 20:18–19). Van de Mieroop has suggested that those sources may refer to the much later Assyrian king Sargon II of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, rather than Sargon of Akkad.

Classical dating
Ctesias, quoted by Diodorus Siculus and in George Syncellus's Chronographia, claimed to have access to manuscripts from Babylonian archives, which date the founding of Babylon to 2286 BC, under the reign of its first king, Belus. A similar figure is found in the writings of Berossus, who, according to Pliny, stated that astronomical observations commenced at Babylon 490 years before the Greek era of Phoroneus, indicating 2243 BC. Stephanus of Byzantium wrote that Babylon was built 1002 years before the date given by Hellanicus of Lesbos for the siege of Troy (1229 BC), which would date Babylon's foundation to 2231 BC. All of these dates place Babylon's foundation in the 23rd century BC. However, cuneiform records have not been found to correspond with these classical, post-cuneiform accounts.

History
The first attested mention of Babylon was in the late 3rd millennium BC during the Akkadian Empire reign of ruler Shar-Kali-Sharri one of whose year names mentions building two temples there. Babylon was ruled by ensi (governors) for the empire. Some of the known governors were Abba, Arši-aḫ, Itūr-ilum, Murteli, Unabatal, and Puzur-Tutu. After that nothing is heard of the city until the time of Sumu-la-El. After around 1950 BC Amorite kingdoms will appear in Uruk and Larsa in the south.

Old Babylonian period
According to a Babylonian king list, Amorite rule in Babylon began (c. 19th or 18th century BC) with a chieftain named Sumu-abum, who declared independence from the neighboring city-state of Kazallu. Sumu-la-El, whose dates may be concurrent with those of Sumu-abum, is usually given as the progenitor of the First Babylonian dynasty. Both are credited with building the walls of Babylon. In any case, the records describe Sumu-la-El's military successes establishing a regional sphere of influence for Babylon.
Babylon was initially a minor city-state, and controlled little surrounding territory. Its first four Amorite rulers did not assume the title of king. The older and more powerful states of Elam, Isin, and Larsa overshadowed Babylon until it became the capital of Hammurabi's short-lived empire about a century later. Hammurabi (r. 1792–1750 BC) is famous for codifying the laws of Babylonia into the Code of Hammurabi. He conquered all of the cities and city states of southern Mesopotamia, including Isin, Larsa, Ur, Uruk, Nippur, Lagash, Eridu, Kish, Adab, Eshnunna, Akshak, Shuruppak, Bad-tibira, Sippar, and Girsu, coalescing them into one kingdom, ruled from Babylon. Hammurabi also invaded and conquered Elam to the east, and the kingdoms of Mari and Ebla to the northwest. After a conflict with the Old Assyrian period king Ishme-Dagan, he forced his successor to pay tribute late in his reign.
After the reign of Hammurabi, the whole of southern Mesopotamia came to be known as Babylonia. From this time, Babylon supplanted Nippur and Eridu as the major religious centers of southern Mesopotamia. Hammurabi's empire destabilized after his death. The far south of Mesopotamia broke away, forming the native Sealand Dynasty, and the Elamites appropriated territory in eastern Mesopotamia. The Amorite dynasty remained in power in Babylon, which again became a small city state. After the destruction of the city the Kassites rose to control the region.
Texts from Old Babylon often include references to Shamash, the sun-god of Sippar, treated as a supreme deity, and Marduk, considered as his son. Marduk was later elevated to a higher status and Shamash lowered, perhaps reflecting Babylon's rising political power.

Middle Babylon
In 1595 BC, the city is thought to have been sacked by Mursili I, ruler of the Hittite Empire sometime during the 31-year reign of Samsu-Ditana, last ruler of the First Dynasty of Babylon. This is based on a line in the century later Telepinu Proclamation reading "Subsequently he marched to Babylon and he destroyed Babylon, and defeated the Hurrian troops, and brought captives and possessions of Babylon to Hattusa.". Originally it was thought that cult statues of Babylon, including Marduk, were carried off to the Kingdom of Khana but the source Agum-Kakrime Inscription is now generally considered a much later forgery. Thereafter, the Kassite dynasty took power in the city of Babylon, renaming it Karduniash, ushering in a dynasty that lasted for 435 years, until 1160 BC.
Babylon was weakened during the Kassite era, and as a result, Kassite Babylon began paying tribute to the Pharaoh of Egypt, Thutmose III, following his eighth campaign against Mitanni. Kassite Babylon eventually became subject to the Middle Assyrian Empire (1365–1053 BC) to the north, and Elam to the east, with both powers vying for control of the city.
By 1155 BC, after continued attacks and annexing of territory by the Assyrians and Elamites, the Kassites were deposed in Babylon. An Akkadian south Mesopotamian dynasty then ruled for the first time. However, Babylon remained weak and subject to domination by Assyria. Its ineffectual native kings were unable to prevent new waves of foreign West Semitic settlers from the deserts of the Levant, including the Arameans and Suteans in the 11th century BC, and finally the Chaldeans in the 9th century BC, entering and appropriating areas of Babylonia for themselves. The Arameans briefly ruled in Babylon during the late 11th century BC.

Assyrian period
During the rule of the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911–609 BC), Babylonia was under constant Assyrian domination or direct control. During the reign of Sennacherib of Assyria, Babylonia was in a constant state of revolt, led by a chieftain named Merodach-Baladan, in alliance with the Elamites, and suppressed only by the complete destruction of the city of Babylon. In 689 BC, its walls, temples and palaces were razed, and the rubble was thrown into the Arakhtu, the sea bordering the earlier Babylon on the south. The destruction of the religious center shocked many, and the subsequent murder of Sennacherib by two of his own sons while praying to the god Nisroch was considered an act of atonement.
Consequently, his successor, Esarhaddon hastened to rebuild the old city and make it his residence for part of the year. After his death, Babylonia was governed by his elder son, the Assyrian prince Shamash-shum-ukin, who eventually started a civil war in 652 BC against his own brother, Ashurbanipal, who ruled in Nineveh. Shamash-shum-ukin enlisted the help of other peoples against Assyria, including Elam, Persia, the Chaldeans, and Suteans of southern Mesopotamia, and the Canaanites and Arabs dwelling in the deserts south of Mesopotamia.
Once again, Babylon was besieged by the Assyrians, starved into surrender and its allies were defeated. Ashurbanipal celebrated a "service of reconciliation", but did not venture to "take the hands" of Bel. An Assyrian governor named Kandalanu was appointed as ruler of the city. Ashurbanipal did collect texts from Babylon for inclusion in his extensive library at Ninevah.

Neo-Babylonian Empire
Under Nabopolassar, Babylon escaped Assyrian rule, and the allied Medo-Babylonian armies destroyed the Assyrian Empire between 626 BC and 609 BC. Babylon thus became the capital of the Neo-Babylonian (sometimes called the Chaldean) Empire.
With the recovery of Babylonian independence, a new era of architectural activity ensued, particularly during the reign of his son Nebuchadnezzar II (604–561 BC). Nebuchadnezzar ordered the complete reconstruction of the imperial grounds, including the Etemenanki ziggurat, and the construction of the Ishtar Gate—the most prominent of eight gates around Babylon. A reconstruction of the Ishtar Gate is located in the Pergamon Museum in Berlin.
Nebuchadnezzar is also credited with the construction of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, said to have been built for his homesick wife, Amytis. Whether the gardens actually existed is a matter of dispute. German archaeologist Robert Koldewey speculated that he had discovered its foundations, but many historians disagree about the location. Stephanie Dalley has argued that the hanging gardens were actually located near the Assyrian capital, Nineveh.
Nebuchadnezzar is also notoriously associated with the Babylonian exile of the Jews, the result of an imperial technique of pacification, used also by the Assyrians, in which ethnic groups in conquered areas were deported en masse to the capital. According to the Hebrew Bible, he destroyed Solomon's Temple and exiled the Jews to Babylon. The defeat was also recorded in the Babylonian Chronicles.

Persian conquest
In 539 BC, the Neo-Babylonian Empire fell to Cyrus the Great, king of Persia, with a military engagement known as the Battle of Opis. Babylon's walls were considered impenetrable. The only way into the city was through one of its many gates, or through the Euphrates River. Metal grates were installed underwater, allowing the river to flow through the city walls while preventing intrusion. The Persians devised a plan to enter the city via the river. During a Babylonian national feast, Cyrus' troops upstream diverted the Euphrates River, allowing Cyrus' soldiers to enter the city through the lowered water. The Persian army conquered the outlying areas of the city while the majority of Babylonians at the city center were unaware of the breach. The account was elaborated upon by Herodotus
Herodotus also described a moat, an enormously tall and broad wall, cemented with bitumen and with buildings on top, and a hundred gates to the city. He writes that the Babylonians wear turbans and perfume and bury their dead in honey, that they practice ritual prostitution, and that three tribes among them eat nothing but fish. The hundred gates can be considered a reference to Homer. Following the pronouncement of Archibald Henry Sayce in 1883, Herodotus' account of Babylon has largely been considered to represent Greek folklore rather than an authentic voyage to Babylon. However, recently, Dalley and others have suggested taking Herodotus' account seriously.

According to 2 Chronicles 36 of the Hebrew Bible, Cyrus later issued a decree permitting captive people, including the Jews, to return to their own lands. The text found on the Cyrus Cylinder has traditionally been seen by biblical scholars as corroborative evidence of this policy, although the interpretation is disputed because the text identifies only Mesopotamian sanctuaries but makes no mention of Jews, Jerusalem, or Judea.
Under Cyrus and the subsequent Persian king Darius I, Babylon became the capital city of the 9th Satrapy (Babylonia in the south and Athura in the north), as well as a center of learning and scientific advancement. In Achaemenid Persia, the ancient Babylonian arts of astronomy and mathematics were revitalized, and Babylonian scholars completed maps of constellations. The city became the administrative capital of the Persian Empire and remained prominent for over two centuries. Many important archaeological discoveries have been made that can provide a better understanding of that era.
The early Persian kings had attempted to maintain the religious ceremonies of Marduk, who was the most important god, but by the reign of Darius III, over-taxation and the strain of numerous wars led to a deterioration of Babylon's main shrines and canals, and the destabilization of the surrounding region. There were numerous attempts at rebellion and in 522 BC (Nebuchadnezzar III), 521 BC (Nebuchadnezzar IV) and 482 BC (Bel-shimani and Shamash-eriba) native Babylonian kings briefly regained independence. However, these revolts were quickly repressed and Babylon remained under Persian rule for two centuries, until Alexander the Great's entry in 331 BC. Following his conquests, he died in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar II in Babylon on the evening of 10–11 June 323 BC.

Hellenistic period
In October of 331 BC, Darius III, the last Achaemenid king of the Persian Empire, was defeated by the forces of the Ancient Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great at the Battle of Gaugamela, occupying Babylon. Under Alexander, Babylon again flourished as a center of learning and commerce. However, following Alexander's death in 323 BC in the palace of Nebuchadnezzar, his empire was divided amongst his generals, the Diadochi, and decades of fighting soon began. Babylon was within the Seleucid Empire throughout most of this period, and declined somewhat in importance but remained active.

Renewed Persian rule
Under the Parthian and Sassanid Empires, Babylon (like Assyria) became a province of these Persian Empires for nine centuries, until after AD 650. Although it was captured briefly by Trajan in AD 116 to be part of the newly conquered province of Mesopotamia, his successor Hadrian relinquished his conquests east of the Euphrates river, which became again the Roman Empire's eastern boundary.
However, Babylon maintained its own culture and people, who spoke varieties of Aramaic, and who continued to refer to their homeland as Babylon. Examples of their culture are found in the Babylonian Talmud, the Gnostic Mandaean religion, Eastern Rite Christianity and the religion of the philosopher Mani. Christianity was introduced to Mesopotamia in the 1st and 2nd centuries, and Babylon was the seat of a Bishop of the Church of the East until well after the Arab/Islamic conquest. Coins from the Parthian, Sasanian and Arabic periods excavated in Babylon demonstrate the continuity of settlement there.

Muslim conquest
In the mid-7th century, Mesopotamia was conquered and settled by the expanding Muslim Empire, and a period of Islamization followed. Babylon was dissolved as a province and Aramaic and Church of the East Christianity eventually became marginalized. Ibn Hawqal (10th century) and Arab scholar al-Qazwini (13th century) describe Babylon (Babil) as a small village. The latter described a well referred to as the 'Dungeon of Daniel' that was visited by Christians and Jews during holidays. The grave-shrine of Amran ibn Ali was visited by Muslims.
According to medieval Arabic writings, Babylon was a popular site to extract bricks, which were used to build cities from Baghdad to Basra.
European travellers, in many cases, could not discover the city's location, or mistook Fallujah for it. Benjamin of Tudela, a 12th-century traveller, mentions Babylon, but it is not clear if he went there. Others referred to Baghdad as Babylon or New Babylon and described various structures encountered in the region as the Tower of Babel. Pietro della Valle travelled to the village of Babil in Babylon in the 17th century and noted the existence of both baked and dried mudbricks cemented with bitumen.

Modern era
The eighteenth century saw an increasing flow of travellers to Babylon, including Carsten Niebuhr and Pierre-Joseph de Beauchamp, as well as measurements of its latitude. Beauchamp's memoir, published in English translation in 1792, provoked the British East India Company to direct its agents in Baghdad and Basra to acquire Mesopotamian relics for shipment to London.
By 1905, there were several villages in Babylon, one of which was Qwaresh with about 200 households located within the boundaries of the ancient inner city walls. The village grew due to the need for laborers during the German Oriental Society excavations between 1899 and 1917.

Iraqi government
The site of Babylon has been a cultural asset to Iraq since the creation of the modern Iraqi state in 1921. The site was officially protected and excavated by the Kingdom of Iraq under British Administration, which later became the Hashemite Kingdom of Iraq, and its successors: the Arab Federation, the Iraqi Republic, Ba'athist Iraq, also officially called the Iraqi Republic, and the Republic of Iraq. Babylonian images periodically appear on Iraqi postcards and stamps. In the 1960s, a replica of the Ishtar Gate and a reconstruction of Ninmakh Temple were built on site.
In February 1978, the Ba'athist government of Iraq under Saddam Hussein, began the "Archaeological Restoration of Babylon Project": reconstructing features of the ancient city atop its ruins. These features included the Southern Palace of Nebuchadnezzar, with 250 rooms, five courtyards, and a 30-meter (98 ft) entrance arch. The project reinforced the Processional Way, the Lion of Babylon, and an amphitheater constructed in the city's Hellenistic era. In 1982, the government minted a set of seven coins, displaying iconic features of Babylon. A Babylon International Festival was held in September 1987, and annually thereafter until 2002, excepting 1990 and 1991, to showcase this work. The proposed reconstruction of the Hanging Gardens and the great ziggurat never took place.
Hussein installed a portrait of himself and Nebuchadnezzar at the entrance to the ruins and inscribed his name on many of the bricks, in imitation of Nebuchadnezzar. One frequent inscription reads "This was built by Saddam Hussein, son of Nebuchadnezzar, to glorify Iraq." These bricks became sought after as collector's items after Hussein's downfall. Similar projects were conducted at Nineveh, Nimrud, Assur and Hatra, to demonstrate the magnificence of Arab achievement.
In the 1980s, Hussein completely removed the village of Qwaresh, displacing its residents. He later constructed a modern palace in that area called Saddam Hill, over some of the old ruins, in the pyramidal style of a ziggurat. In 2003, he intended to have a cable car line constructed over Babylon, but plans were halted by the 2003 invasion of Iraq.

Under US and Polish occupation
Following the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the area around Babylon came under the control of US troops, before being handed over to Polish forces in September 2003. US forces under the command of General James T. Conway of the I Marine Expeditionary Force were criticized for building the military base "Camp Alpha", with a helipad and other facilities on ancient Babylonian ruins during the Iraq War. US forces occupied the site for some time and caused irreparable damage to the archaeological record. In a report of the British Museum's Near East department, John Curtis described how parts of the archaeological site were levelled to create a landing area for helicopters, and parking lots for heavy vehicles. Curtis wrote of the occupation forces:

They caused substantial damage to the Ishtar Gate, one of the most famous monuments from antiquity [...] US military vehicles crushed 2,600-year-old brick pavements, archaeological fragments were scattered across the site, more than 12 trenches were driven into ancient deposits and military earth-moving projects contaminated the site for future generations of scientists.
A US military spokesman claimed that engineering operations were discussed with the "head of the Babylon museum". The head of the Iraqi State Board for Heritage and Antiquities, Donny George, said that the "mess will take decades to sort out" and criticised Polish troops for causing "terrible damage" to the site. Poland resolved in 2004 to place the city under Iraq control, and commissioned a report titled Report Concerning the Condition of the Preservation of the Babylon Archaeological Site, which it presented at a meeting in December 2004. In 2005, the site was handed over to the Iraqi Ministry of Culture.
In April 2006, Colonel John Coleman, former Chief of Staff for the I Marine Expeditionary Force, offered to issue an apology for the damage done by military personnel under his command. He also claimed that the US presence had deterred far greater damage by other looters. An April 2006 article stated that UN officials and Iraqi leaders have plans to restore Babylon, making it into a cultural center.
Two museums and a library, containing replicas of artifacts and local maps and reports, were raided and destroyed.

Present-day
In May 2009, the provincial government of Babil reopened the site to tourists. Over 35,000 people visited in 2017. An oil pipeline runs through an outer wall of the city. In July 2019, the site of Babylon was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Thousands of people reside in Babylon within the perimeter of the ancient outer city walls, and communities in and around them are "rapidly developing from compact, dense settlements to sprawling suburbia despite laws restricting constructions". Modern villages include Zwair West, Sinjar Village, Qwaresh, and Al-Jimjmah, among which the first two are better off economically. Most residents primarily depend on daily wage earning or have government jobs in Al-Hillah. Some cultivate dates, citrus fruits, figs, fodder for livestock and limited cash crops, although income from the land alone is not enough to sustain a family. Both Shi'a and Sunni Muslims live in Sinjar village, with mosques for both groups.
The State Board of Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH) is the main authority responsible for the conservation of the archeological site. They are assisted by Antiquity and Heritage Police, and maintain a permanent presence there. The World Monuments Fund is involved in research and conservation. The SBAH Provincial Inspectorate Headquarters is located within the boundaries of the ancient inner city walls on the east side. Several staff members and their families reside in subsidized housing in this area.

Cultural importance
Before modern archaeological excavations in Mesopotamia, the appearance of Babylon was largely a mystery, and typically envisioned by Western artists as a hybrid between ancient Egyptian, classical Greek, and contemporary Ottoman culture.
Due to Babylon's historical significance as well as references to it in the Bible, the word "Babylon" in various languages has acquired a generic meaning of a large, bustling diverse city. Examples include:

Babylon is used in reggae music as a concept in the Rastafari belief system, denoting the materialistic capitalist world, or any form of imperialist evil. It is believed that Babylon actively seeks to exploit and oppress the people of the world, specifically people of African descent. It is believed by Rastafarians that Babylon attempts to forbid the smoking of ganja because this sacred herb opens minds to the truth.
Babylon 5 – A science fiction series set on a futuristic space station that acts as a trading and diplomatic nexus between many different cultures. Many stories focus on the theme of different societies and cultures uniting, respecting differences, and learning from each other rather than fighting or looking on each other with prejudice and suspicion.
Babylon A.D. takes place in New York City, decades in the future.
Babilonas (Lithuanian name for "Babylon") is a real estate development in Lithuania.
"Babylon" is a song by Lady Gaga that uses allusions to ancient Biblical themes to discuss gossip.
Eternals (2021) depicts Babylon on its greatest extent and is shown to be protected and aided in its development by the titular species team.

Biblical narrative
In Genesis 10:10, Babel (Babylon) is described as founded by Nimrod along with Uruk, Akkad and perhaps Calneh—all of them in Shinar ("Calneh" is now sometimes translated not as a proper name but as the phrase "all of them"). Another story is given in Genesis 11, which describes a united human race, speaking one language, migrating to Shinar to establish a city and tower—the Tower of Babel. God halts construction of the tower by scattering humanity across the earth and confusing their communication so they are unable to understand each other in the same language.
According to 2 Kings 20:12 and Isaiah 39 of the Hebrew Bible after Hezekiah, the king of Judah, became ill, Baladan, king of Babylon, sent a letter and gifts to him. Hezekiah showed all of his treasures to the delegation, and the prophet Isaiah later said to him: "Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried into Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the LORD".
According to Daniel 5 the prophet Daniel lived in Babylon for most of his life. Nebuchadnezzar made Daniel ruler over the entire province of Babylon for having interpreted his dream. Years later, Belshazzar held a banquet, at which fingers of a hand appeared and wrote on a wall. Daniel was called to provide an interpretation of the writings, upon which he explained that God had put an end to Belshazzar's kingdom. Belshazzar was killed that very night, and Darius the Mede took over the kingdom.
Isaiah 13:19 says the following regarding Babylon: "And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there." Jeremiah 50 says that Babylon "shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate".
In Jewish tradition, Babylon symbolizes an oppressor against which righteous believers must struggle. In Christianity, Babylon symbolizes worldliness and evil. Prophecies sometimes symbolically link the kings of Babylon with Lucifer. Nebuchadnezzar II, sometimes conflated with Nabonidus, appears as the foremost ruler in this narrative.
The Book of Revelation in the Christian Bible refers to Babylon many centuries after it ceased to be a major political center. The city is personified by the "Whore of Babylon", riding on a scarlet beast with seven heads and ten horns, and drunk on the blood of the righteous. Some scholars of apocalyptic literature believe this New Testament "Babylon" to be a dysphemism for the Roman Empire. Other scholars suggest that Babylon in the book of Revelation has a symbolic significance that extends beyond mere identification with the first century Roman empire.

Babylon in art
See also
Akitu
Cities of the ancient Near East
Euphrates Tunnel – Legendary tunnel under the river Euphrates
Jehoiachin's Rations Tablets
List of Kings of Babylon
Tomb of Daniel

Notes
References
Sources
Cancik-Kirschbaum, Eva, Margarete van Ess, & Joachim Marzahn, eds. (2011). Babylon: Wissenskultur in Orient und Okzident. Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-022212-8.
Finkel, I. L. and M. J. Seymour, eds. Babylon. Oxford University Press, 2009. ISBN 0-19-538540-3 . Exhibition organized by British Museum, Musée du Louvre & Réunion des Musées Nationaux, and Staatliche Museen zu Berlin.
Liverani, Mario. Imagining Babylon: The Modern Story of an Ancient City. Translated from Italian to English by Ailsa Campbell. Boston: De Gruyter, 2016. ISBN 978-1-61451-602-6. Originally published as Immaginare Babele in 2013.
Seymour, M. J. (2006). The idea of Babylon: archaeology and representation in Mesopotamia (Doctoral thesis). University College London. OCLC 500097655.
Vedeler, Harold Torger. A Social and Economic Survey of the Reign of Samsuiluna of Babylon (1794–1712 BC). PhD dissertation accepted at Yale, May 2006.

Further reading
Abdul-Razzak, Wahbi, "Ishtar gate and its inner wall" Sumer 35, pp. 112–117, 1979 (in Arabic)
Ali, Shah Mohammed, "The Southern Palace", Sumer 35, pp. 82–93, 1979 (in Arabic)
[23] Al-Assadi, Hind A., and Najah A. Abd, "Application of Georadar Method to Investigate Shallow Artifacts for Al-Maabid Area in Babylon Archaeological City", The Iraqi Geological Journal, pp. 288–295, 2024
Al-Kassar, Awwad Abdul-Kareem, "Views and conclusions about the excavations of the northern part of the procession street for the year 1981" Sumer 41, Arabic section, pp. 137–138, 1985 (in Arabic)
Alwan, Kamil Shihab, "The Vaulted Structures or the so-called Hanging Gardens", Sumer 35, pp. 127–136, 1979 (in Arabic)
Dalley, Stephanie (2021). The City of Babylon: A History c. 2000 BC – AD 116. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-316-50177-1.
Kamil, Ahmed Mohammed, "The inner wall of Babylon", Sumer 35, pp. 137–149, 1979 (in Arabic)
King, L. W., "Babylonian Religion and Mythology", 1899
[24] Koldewey, Robert, "Pflastersteine Von Aiburschabu In Babylon", J. C. Hinrichs'sch Buchhandlung, 1901
Maul, Stefan (1997). "The Ancient Middle Eastern Capital City – Reflection and Navel of the World". Stanford Presidential Lectures and Symposia in the Humanities and Arts. – originally published in German "Die altorientalische Hauptstadt – Abbild und Nabel der Wel". Die Orientalische Stadt: Kontinuitat. Wandel. Bruch. 1 Internationale Colloquium der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft. 9–10. Mai 1996 in Halle/Saale. Saarbrücker Druckerei und Verlag: 109–124. 1997.
[25] Maurice, Thomas, "Observations on the ruins of Babylon, as recently visited and described by Claudius James Rich, Esq. resident for the East India Company at Bagdad; with illustrative engravings", London: John Murray, Albemarle Street, 1816
Mommsen, Theodor; Dickson, William Purdie; Haverfield, Francis (2004). The provinces of the Roman Empire: from Caesar to Diocletian, Vol. II. Gorgias Press LLC. ISBN 978-1-59333-026-2.
Oates, Joan (1986). Babylon. Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-02095-7. and ISBN 0-500-27384-7 (paperback)
Nasir, Mohammad, "The Temple of Ishtar of Agade", Sumer 35, pp. 61–81, 1979 (in Arabic)
Nasir, Mohammad, "The so-called Summer Palace (Nebuchadnezzar’s life palace)" Sumer 35, pp. 150–159, 1979 (in Arabic)
[26] Sollberger, Edmond, "Babylon’s beginnings", Sumer 41, pp. 10–13, 1985

External links

Iranian archaeologists to perform survey in Babylon - Tehran Times - January 29, 2023
Modern Wars and Ancient Governance: Archaeology and Textual Finds from First Millennium BCE Babylon – Odette Boivin – ANE Today – Nov 2022
– The Babylonian Akītu Festival and the Ritual Humiliation of the King – Sam Mirelman – ANE Today – Sep 2022 Archived 2023-06-30 at the Wayback Machine
The Babylon Project – Freie Universität Berlin
Babylon on In Our Time at the BBC
Iraq Image – Babylon Satellite Observation
Site Photographs of Babylon – Oriental Institute Archived 2009-04-27 at the Wayback Machine
1901–1906 Jewish Encyclopedia, Babylon
Beyond Babylon: art, trade, and diplomacy in the second millennium B.C., Issued in connection with an exhibition held Nov. 18, 2008-Mar. 15, 2009, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York
Osama S. M. Amin, "Visiting the ancient city of Babylon", Ancient History Et Cetera, 17 November 2014.
Video of reconstructed palace: Iraq elections: The palace that Nebuchadnezzar built on YouTube
Babylon wrecked by war, The Guardian, January 15, 2005
"Experts: Iraq invasion harmed historic Babylon". Associated Press. July 10, 2009.
UNESCO Final Report on Damage Assessment in Babylon


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 354
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babylon
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Babylon est le nom anglais de « Babylone ».

Toponyme
Babylon est un nom de lieu notamment porté  par :

Babylon, commune du district de Domažlice, dans la région de Plzeň, en République tchèque ;
Babylon, ville américaine située dans l’État de New York ;
Babylon, village américain du comté de Suffolk dans l'État de New York.

Œuvres
Babylon est un titre notamment porté par :

Films
Babylon, film britannique de Franco Rosso (en) sorti en 1980 ;
Babylon, film néerlandais réalisé par Eddy Terstall en 1998 ;
Babylon, film américain de Damien Chazelle sorti en 2022 ;

Séries télévisées
Babylon, série télévisée britannique diffusée de 13 novembre 2014 à 18 décembre 2014 sur Channel 4 ;
Babylon 5, série américaine de science-fiction, diffusée de 1993 à 1998
Babylon , série de romans et ses différentes adaptations (un manga et une série d’animation japonaise) ;

Épisodes de séries télévisées
Babylon, titre original de Babylone, 5e épisode de la 1e saison de La Caravane de l'étrange (Carnivàle) ;
Babylon, titre original de Babylone, 6e épisode de la 1e saison de Mad Men ;
Babylon, titre original de Pour l'honneur, 8e épisode de la 9e saison de Stargate SG-1 ;
Babylon, titre original de Épisode 5 : Babylon, 5e épisode de la 10e saison de X-Files : Aux frontières du réel (The X-Files) ;

Chansons
Babylon (en), chanson de David Gray présente sur l'album White Ladder sorti en novembre 1988 ;
Babylon (en), chanson de The Tea Party présente sur l'album Transmission (en) sorti le 19 août 1997 ;

Albums
Babylon (en), album de Dr. John sorti le 17 janvier 1969 ;
Babylon (en), album de Skindred sorti en juillet 2002 ;
Bridges to Babylon, album des Rolling Stones sorti en 1997 ;
Babylon (en), album de Ten sorti le 28 août 2000 ;
Babylon, album de WASP sorti le 13 octobre 2009.

Groupes de musique
Babylon, groupe américain de rock progressif actif de 1976 à 1978
Babylon Circus, groupe de ska français
Babylon Pression, groupe de punk hardcore français

Autres
Babylon, logiciel de traduction et de reconnaissance optique de caractères
Kino Babylon, cinéma de Berlin


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 630
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Babylon
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Babylon is a  UNESCO World Heritage Site in Iraq, today only ruins; it was once one of the most prominent cities of Ancient Mesopotamia. Alexander the Great chose Babylon to be the capital of the great empire he had created, and died there while planning further conquests; for several centuries after that it was a major center of the Seleucid Empire founded by one of his generals.

## Understand
It is likely that Babylon (from Bab Ilim, Gate of the Gods) was founded in the third millennium BC and rose to prominence over the next thousand years. By the 18th century BC the city was the centre of the empire of Hammurabi. Various empires controlled Babylon over the following centuries. Babylon briefly regained independence during the Neo-Babylonian empire towards the end of the 7th century BC, most notably under the reign of king Nebuchadnezzar II, but came under Persian rule in the 6th century BC. In the 4th century BC, Alexander the Great captured Babylon. Babylon remained a notable Persian province until the 7th century AD, and then fell into decline.
The ruins of Babylon have suffered greatly due to looting and destructive policies. Parts of Nebuchadnezzar's palace and some of the old city walls remain. Saddam Hussein commissioned a non-scientific, very controversial "restoration" of ancient Babylon on part of the site, in the process destroying much of the ancient site all the way to the foundations. A modern palace was constructed for him on what was purported to have been Nebuchadnezzar's ancient palace.
A reconstruction of Babylon's Ishtar Gate is displayed in the Pergamon Museum in Berlin.

## Get in
The ruins are located about 5 km (3.1 mi) north from the city of Hillah, the capital of Babylon Province. Hillah is well-connected with overnight trains from Baghdad and Basra as well as highways. Taxi is recommended for travelling from the city to Babylon.

## See
32.54148544.423691 Ishtar Gate. While the original gate was dismantled and reconstructed in the Pergamon Museum, Berlin, this replica is similar in looks but smaller than the original.      (updated Feb 2019)
32.54491244.4212372 Lion of Babylon. Built by the Chaldean Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar II (605-562 BC).   (updated Feb 2019)
Kasr. Also called Palace or Castle. It is the location of the Neo-Babylonian ziggurat Etemenanki of Nabopolassar and later Nebuchadnezzar and lies in the center of the site. (updated Nov 2020)
32.53388944.4213863 Esagila, on a mound called Amran Ibn Ali (to the south). A temple of Marduk which also contained shrines to Ea and Nabu.   (updated Nov 2020)
Homera. Reddish colored mound on the west side. Most of the Hellenistic remains are here. (updated Nov 2020)
Babil. In the northern end of the site, about 22 m in height. It has been extensively subject to brick robbing since ancient times. It held a palace built by Nebuchadnezzar. (updated Nov 2020)
32.53638944.4208334 Etemenanki. Former ziggurat dedicated to the god Marduk. Constructed sometime between the 14th and 9th century BCE, it was fully destroyed by Alexander the Great in 331 BCE in order to prepare for a large reconstruction. However, the death of Alexander halted further work and it has been a ruin since then. Some scholars have suggested Etemenanki as a possible inspiration to the biblical story of the Tower of Babel.   (updated Mar 2022)

## Modern sights
32.54320444.4168675 Saddam Hussein's Babylonian Summer Palace. Ridiculously over sized and out of place, the palace is one of the best examples of the former dictator's hubris. Situated on a hill overlooking the archaeological site, it provides excellent views. Visitors are free to wander within the palace and while some parts are covered in graffiti, many exquisite details such as ornaments remain intact.    (updated Apr 2023)

## Sleep
32.540544.4141 Babylon Tourist Resort (منتجع بابل السياحي).    (updated Mar 2022)



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ISHTAR GATE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:33:11


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,694
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ishtar_Gate
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Ishtar Gate was the eighth gate to the inner city wall of Babylon (in the area of present-day Hillah, Babylon Governorate, Iraq). It was constructed c. 569 BC by order of King Nebuchadnezzar II on the north side of the city. It was part of a grand walled processional way leading into the city.
The original structure was a double gate with a smaller frontal gate and a larger and more grandiose secondary posterior section. The walls were finished in glazed bricks mostly in blue, with animals and deities (also made up of coloured bricks) in low relief at intervals. The gate was 15 metres high, and the original foundations extended another 14 metres underground.
German archaeologist Robert Koldewey led the excavation of the site from 1904 to 1914. After the end of the First World War in 1918, the smaller frontal gate was reconstructed in the Pergamon Museum in Berlin.
Other panels from the façade of the gate are located in many other museums around the world.
The façade of the Iraqi embassy in Beijing, China, includes a replica of the Ishtar Gate. The façades of the Iraqi embassies in Amman, Jordan, and Islamabad, Pakistan, also evoke the Ishtar Gate.

History
King Nebuchadnezzar II reigned 604–562 BC, the peak of the Neo-Babylonian Empire. He is known as the biblical conqueror who captured Jerusalem. He ordered the construction of the gate and dedicated it to the Babylonian goddess Ishtar. The gate was constructed using glazed brick with alternating rows of bas-relief mušḫuššu (dragons), aurochs (bulls), and lions, symbolizing the gods Marduk, Adad, and Ishtar respectively.
The roof and doors of the gate were made of cedar, according to the dedication plaque. The bricks in the gate were covered in a blue glaze meant to represent lapis lazuli, a deep-blue semi-precious stone that was revered in antiquity due to its vibrancy. The blue-glazed bricks would have given the façade a jewel-like shine. Through the gate ran the Processional Way, which was lined with walls showing about 120 lions, bulls, dragons, and flowers on yellow and black glazed bricks, symbolizing the goddess Ishtar. The gate itself depicted only gods and goddesses. These included Ishtar, Adad, and Marduk. During celebrations of the New Year, statues of the deities were paraded through the gate and down the Processional Way.

Design
The front of the gate has a low-relief design with a repeated pattern of images of two of the major gods of the Babylonian pantheon. Marduk, the national deity and chief god, with his servant dragon Mušḫuššu, is depicted as a dragon with a snake-like head and tail, a scaled body of a lion, and powerful talons for back feet. Marduk was seen as the divine champion of good against evil, and the incantations of the Babylonians often sought his protection.

The second god shown in the pattern of reliefs on the Ishtar Gate is Adad (also known as Ishkur), whose sacred animal was the aurochs, a now-extinct ancestor of cattle. Adad had power over destructive storms and beneficial rain. The design of the Ishtar Gate also includes linear borders and patterns of rosettes, often seen as symbols of fertility.
The bricks of the Ishtar gate were made from finely textured clay pressed into wooden forms. Each of the animal reliefs was also made from bricks formed by pressing clay into reusable molds. Seams between the bricks were carefully planned not to occur on the eyes of the animals or any other aesthetically unacceptable places. The bricks were sun-dried and then fired once before glazing. The clay was brownish red in this bisque-fired state.
The background glazes are mainly a vivid blue, which imitates the color of the highly prized lapis lazuli. Gold and brown glazes are used for animal images. The borders and rosettes are glazed in black, white, and gold. It is believed that the glaze recipe used plant ash, sandstone conglomerates, and pebbles for silicates. This combination was repeatedly melted, cooled, and then pulverized. This mixture of silica and fluxes is called a frit. Color-producing minerals, such as cobalt, were added in the final glaze formulations. This was then painted onto the bisque-fired bricks and fired to a higher temperature in a glaze firing.
The creation of the gate out of wood and clay glazed to look like lapis lazuli could possibly be a reference to the goddess Inanna, who became syncretized with the goddess Ishtar during the reign of Sargon of Akkad. In the myth of Inanna's descent to the underworld, Inanna is described as donning seven accoutrements of lapis lazuli symbolizing her divine power. Once captured by the queen of the underworld, Inanna is described as being lapis lazuli, silver, and wood, two of these materials being key components in the construction of the Ishtar Gate. The creation of the gate out of wood and "lapis lazuli" linking the gate to being part of the Goddess herself.
After the glaze firing, the bricks were assembled, leaving narrow horizontal seams from one to six millimeters. The seams were then sealed with a naturally occurring black viscous substance called bitumen, like modern asphalt. The Ishtar Gate is only one small part of the design of ancient Babylon that also included the palace, temples, an inner fortress, walls, gardens, other gates, and the Processional Way. The lavish city was decorated with over 15 million baked bricks, according to estimates.

The main gate led to the Southern Citadel, the gate itself seeming to be a part of Imgur-Bel and Nimitti-Bel, two of the most prominent defensive walls of Babylon. There were three primary entrances to the Ishtar Gate: the central entrance which contained the double gate structure (two sets of double doors, for a fourfold door structure), and doors flanking the main entrance to the left and right, both containing the signature double door structure.

Ishtar Gate and Processional Way
Once per year, the Ishtar Gate and connecting Processional Way were used for a New Year's procession, which was part of a religious festival celebrating the beginning of the agricultural year. In Babylon, the rituals surrounding this holiday lasted twelve days. The New Year's celebrations started immediately after the barley harvest, at the time of the vernal equinox. This was the first day of the ancient month of Nisan, equivalent to today's date of March 20 or 21.
The Processional Way, which has been traced to a length of over 800 meters, extended north from the Ishtar Gate and was designed with brick relief images of lions, the symbol of the goddess Ishtar (also known as Inanna) the war goddess, the dragon of Marduk, the lord of the gods, and the bull of Adad, the storm god. Worshipped as the Mistress of Heaven, Ishtar represented the power of sexual attraction and was thought to be savage and determined. Symbolized by the star and her sacred animal, the lion, she was also the goddess of war and the protector of ruling dynasties and their armies. The idea of protection of the city is further incorporated into this gateway design by the use of crenelated buttresses along both sides to this entrance into the city.
Friezes with sixty ferocious lions representing Ishtar decorated each side of the Processional Way, designed with variations in the color of the fur and the manes. On the east side, they had a left foot forward, and on the west side, they had the right foot forward. Each lion was made of forty-six molded bricks in eleven rows. The lion is pictured upon a blue enameled tile background and an orange coloured border that runs along the very bottom portion of the wall. Having a white body and yellow mane, the lion of Ishtar was an embodiment of vivid naturalism that further enhanced the glory of Babylon's Procession Street.
The purpose of the New Year's holiday was to affirm the supremacy of Marduk and his representative on Earth, the king, and to offer thanks for the fertility of the land.
The Processional Way was paved with large stone pieces set in a bed of bitumen and was up to 66 feet (20 meters) wide at some points. This street ran from the Euphrates through the temple district and palaces and onto the Ishtar Gate.

Inscription of Nebuchadnezzar II
The inscription of the Ishtar Gate is written in Akkadian cuneiform in white and blue glazed bricks and was a dedication by Nebuchadnezzar to explain the gate's purpose. On the wall of the Ishtar Gate, the inscription is 15 meters tall by 10 meters wide and includes 60 lines of writing. The inscription was created around the same time as the gate's construction, around 605–562 BC.
Inscription:

Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, the pious prince appointed by the will of Marduk, the highest priestly prince, beloved of Nabu, of prudent deliberation, who has learnt to embrace wisdom, who fathomed Their (Marduk and Nabu) godly being and pays reverence to their Majesty, the untiring Governor, who always has at heart the care of the cult of Esagila and Ezida and is constantly concerned with the well being of Babylon and Borsippa, the wise, the humble, the caretaker of Esagila and Ezida, the first born son of Nabopolassar, the King of Babylon, am I.
Both gate entrances of the (city walls) Imgur-Ellil and Nemetti-Ellil following the filling of the street from Babylon had become increasingly lower. (Therefore,) I pulled down these gates and laid their foundations at the water table with asphalt and bricks and had them made of bricks with blue stone on which wonderful bulls and dragons were depicted. I covered their roofs by laying majestic cedars lengthwise over them. I fixed doors of cedar wood adorned with bronze at all the gate openings. I placed wild bulls and ferocious dragons in the gateways and thus adorned them with luxurious splendor so that Mankind might gaze on them in wonder.

I let the temple of Esiskursiskur, the highest festival house of Marduk, the lord of the gods, a place of joy and jubilation for the major and minor deities, be built firm like a mountain in the precinct of Babylon of asphalt and fired bricks.

Excavation and display
A reconstruction of the Ishtar Gate and Processional Way was built at the Pergamon Museum in Berlin out of material excavated by Robert Koldewey. It includes the inscription plaque. It stands 14 m (46 ft) high and 30 m (100 ft) wide. The excavation ran from 1902 to 1914, and, during that time, 14 m (46 ft) of the foundation of the gate was uncovered.

Claudius Rich, British resident of Baghdad and a self-taught historian, did personal research on Babylon because it intrigued him. Acting as a scholar and collecting field data, he was determined to discover the wonders to the ancient world. Rich's topographical records of the ruins in Babylon were the first ever published, in 1815. It was reprinted in England no fewer than three times. Rich and most other 19th-century visitors thought a mound in Babylon was a royal palace, and that was eventually confirmed by Robert Koldewey's excavations, who found two palaces of King Nebuchadnezzar and the Ishtar Gate. Robert Koldewey, a successful German excavator, had done previous work for the Royal Museum of Berlin, with his excavations at Surghul (Ancient Nina) and Al-hiba (ancient Lagash) in 1887. Koldewey's part in Babylon's excavation began in 1899.
The method that the British were comfortable with was excavating tunnels and deep trenches, which was damaging the mud brick architecture of the foundation. Instead, it was suggested that the excavation team focus on tablets and other artifacts rather than pick at the crumbling buildings. Despite the destructive nature of the archaeology used, the recording of data was immensely more thorough than in previous Mesopotamian excavations. Walter Andrae, one of Koldewey's many assistants, was an architect and a draftsman, the first at Babylon. His contribution was documentation and reconstruction of Babylon, and then later, the smuggling of the remains out of Iraq and into Germany. A small museum was built at the site, and Andrae was the museum's first director.
As the German Oriental Society had provided such large funding for the project, the German archeologists involved felt that they needed to justify the cost by smuggling much of the material back to Germany. For example, of the 120 lion friezes along the Procession Street, the Germans took 118. Walter Andrae played a key role in this endeavor using the strong links (or wasta) that he had cultivated with German intelligence officers and with local Iraqi tribal sheikhs. The Gate's ceramic pieces were disassembled according to a complex numbering system and were then packed in straw in coal barrels in order to disguise them. These barrels were then transported down the Euphrates River to Shatt al-Arab, where they were loaded onto German ships and taken to Berlin.
The rebuilding of Babylon's Ishtar Gate and Processional Way in Berlin was one of the most complex architectural reconstructions in the history of archaeology. Hundreds of crates of glazed brick fragments were carefully desalinated and then pieced together. Fragments were combined with new bricks fired in a specially designed kiln to re-create the correct color and finish. It was a double gate; the part that is shown in the Pergamon Museum today is the smaller, frontal part. The larger, back part was considered too large to fit into the constraints of the structure of the museum; it is in storage.
Parts of the gate and animals from the Processional Way are in various other museums around the world. Only four museums acquired dragons, while lions went to several museums. The Istanbul Archaeology Museum has lions, dragons, and bulls. Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek in Copenhagen, Denmark, has one lion, one dragon and one bull. The Detroit Institute of Arts houses a dragon. The Röhsska Museum in Gothenburg, Sweden, has one dragon and one lion; the Louvre, the State Museum of Egyptian Art in Munich, the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna, the Royal Ontario Museum in Toronto, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, the Oriental Institute in Chicago, the Rhode Island School of Design Museum, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, and the Yale University Art Gallery in New Haven, Connecticut, each have lions.
A smaller reproduction of the gate was built in Iraq under Saddam Hussein as the entrance to a museum that has not been completed. Along with the restored palace, the gate was completed in 1987. The construction was meant to emulate the techniques that were used for the original gate. The replica appears similar to the restored original but is notably smaller. The purpose of the replica's construction was an attempt to reconnect to Iraq's history. Damage to this reproduction has occurred since the Iraq War (see Impact of the U.S. military).

Controversy and attempted repatriation
The acquisition of the Ishtar Gate by the Pergamon Museum is surrounded in controversy as the gate was excavated as part of the excavation of Babylon, and immediately shipped off to Berlin where it remains to this day. The government of Iraq has petitioned the German government to return the gate many times, notably in 2002 as well as in 2009. The Ishtar Gate is frequently used as a prime example in the debate regarding repatriating artifacts of cultural significance to countries affected by war and whether these pieces of material culture are better off in a safer environment where they could be preserved. The example in the case of the Ishtar Gate is concerning its safety in the aftermath of the Iraq War, and whether or not the gate would be safer remaining at the Pergamon Museum where it was damaged by bombs in World War II.

Gallery
References
Matson, F.R. (1985), Compositional Studies of the Glazed Brick from the Ishtar Gate at Babylon, Museum of Fine Arts. The Research Laboratory, ISBN 978-0-87846-255-1

External links

Pictures of lion & dragon at the Röhsska museum, Gothenburg
60 pictures of the animal panels in Istanbul Museum
Neo-Babylonian Art: Ishtar Gate and Processional Way Archived 2014-10-29 at the Wayback Machine, Smarthistory
Exhibition "From Fragment to Monument. The Ishtar Gate in Berlin" at the Pergamonmuseum


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 487
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A8%D9%88%D8%A7%D8%A8%D8%A9_%D8%B9%D8%B4%D8%AA%D8%A7%D8%B1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

بوابة عشتار (باللغة الآشورية:ܕܵܪܘܲܐܙܵܐ ܕܥܲܫܬܵܪ) هي البوابة الثامنة لمدينة بابل الداخلية، والتي بناها نبوخذ نصر عام 575 ق.م في شمالي المدينة إهداءً لعشتار آلهة البابليين. ولقد كشف المنقب الألماني روبرت كولدواي في عام 1899م عن أول معالم هذه المدينة.
عثر الألمان على بوابة عشتار الأصلية في أيام الدولة العثمانية، ونقلت إلى ألمانيا ووضعت في متحف بيرغامون في برلين ولاتزال موجودة في المتحف إلى الوقت الحالي. والبوابة على اسم إلهة الزهرة (عشتار) وهي تعني حسب أساطير بابل أنها المتحكمة في أمور البشر لأنها عشيقة كبار الآلهة (اونو، انليل، اشور)، وقيل أن نبوخذ نصر الثاني بناها حبًا لزوجته، والبوابة مكسوة بكاملها بالمرمر الأزرق والرخام الأبيض والقرميد الملون. وكانت مزينة بـ 575 شكلًا حيوانيًا بارزًا منها التنين المعروف بالسيروش والثيران. وعلى جدرانها تماثيل جدارية تمثل الأسد والثور والحيوان الخرافي المسمى (مشخشو) وهو يمثل رمز الآلهة مردوك.
وكانت تعتبر البوابة التي هي جزء من أسوار مدينة بابل واحدة من إحدى عجائب الدنيا السبع في العالم حتى القرن 6 إذ تم استبدالها بمنارة الإسكندرية.
بني أصغر استنساخ للبوابة في العراق في عهد حكم الرئيس أحمد حسن البكر وكذلك مبنى مدخل المتحف الذي لم يكتمل، وقد وقعت الأضرار عليهِ منذ غزو العراق عام 2003. وكذلك مدخل بيت النحات العراقي سالم الحتحوت الذي عرف بشغفه وحبه للآثار العراقية فصمم ونحت واجهة بيته كنسخة من بوابة عشتار في بابل وزينها بالثيران والتنين
وكانت المواكب تدخل من بوابة عشتار، وهي البوابة الرئيسة لسور المدينة الداخلي، والبوابة الرئيسة إلى شارع الموكب الذي يعد الشارع الرئيس لمدينة بابل والطريق المقدس الذي يربط المدينة ببيت الأحتفالات الدينية المعروف ببيت«أكيتو» ويخترق شارع الموكب من بوابة عشتار في اتجاهه نحو الجنوب، ثم بعد ذلك يمتد حتى يكون بالقرب من الجهة الشرقية للقصر الجنوبي، ومن خلال البوابة يتم العبور إلى قناة«ليبيل حيكال» عبر جسر خشبي إلى معبد (نابو شخاري) الواقع إلى الجهة الغربية منها، ويستمر الشارع جنوباً أيضاً بمحاذاة سور الزقورة ومعبد أيساكلا منعطفاً غرباً حتى يتم الوصول إلى نهر (أراختو) وهو الجدول المنساب بمياه نهر الفرات.
و لقد أطلق البابليون على القسم الشمالي من الشارع الذي يبدأ من بوابة عشتار شمالي المدينة الداخلية ثم يمتد جنوباً حتى ينحرف غرباً بين زقورة بابل ومعبد مردوخ متصلاً بالجسر المسمى جسر (بور- شابو) ومعنى هذا الاسم (لن يعبر العدو) والقسم الجنوبي من الشارع أطلق عليه اسم عشتار لاموسو أو مياشو وهي عبارة تعني عشتار حامية جيوشنا.
ويبلغ ارتفاع باب عشتار مع الأبراج خمسين متراً وعرضها ثمانية أمتار والباب محاط بالأبراج الجميلة والعجيبة، وكانت المواكب تدخل من بوابة عشتار إلى المدينة الداخلية، ويعود تاريخ بناء بوابة عشتار إلى حقبة زمنية سابقة لعهد الملك نبوخذ نصر البابلي، لكنه عمرها وزاد في بنيانها بحيث غدت أكثر جمالاً وتميزاً وهو من زينها بالتنين والثيران، وبالطابوق المصقول المطلي، وهو الذي وضع الأبواب بعد أن غطاها بالنحاس وثبت فيها مغاليق ومفاصل من مادة البرونز وهي مازالت موجودة في متحف ألمانيا في برلين.

صور البوابة
مراجع
أساطير على بوابة عشتار
بوابة عشتار البابلية في برلين ـ تحفة فنية بديعة تعكس عظمة الحضارة الشرقية
فيديو عن بوابة عشتار في متحف برلين في ألمانيا - يوتيوب على يوتيوب

انظر أيضا
عشتار
متحف بيرغامون



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
HANGING GARDENS OF BABYLON
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: legendary_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:33:19


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,113
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hanging_Gardens_of_Babylon
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hanging Gardens of Babylon were one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World listed by Hellenic culture. They were described as a remarkable feat of engineering with an ascending series of tiered gardens containing a wide variety of trees, shrubs, and vines, resembling a large green mountain constructed of mud bricks. It was said to have been built in the ancient city of Babylon, near present-day Hillah, Babil province, in Iraq. The Hanging Gardens' name is derived from the Greek word κρεμαστός (kremastós, lit. 'overhanging'), which has a broader meaning than the modern English word "hanging" and refers to trees being planted on a raised structure such as a terrace.
According to one legend, the Hanging Gardens were built alongside a grand palace known as The Marvel of Mankind, by the Neo-Babylonian King Nebuchadnezzar II (who ruled between 605 and 562 BC), for his Median wife, Queen Amytis, because she missed the green hills and valleys of her homeland. This was attested to by the Babylonian priest Berossus, writing in about 290 BC, a description that was later quoted by Josephus. The construction of the Hanging Gardens has also been attributed to the legendary queen Semiramis and they have been called the Hanging Gardens of Semiramis as an alternative name.
The Hanging Gardens are the only one of the Seven Wonders whose location has not been definitively established. No extant Babylonian texts mention the gardens and no definitive archaeological evidence has been found in Babylon. Three theories have been suggested to account for this: first, that the gardens were purely mythical, and the descriptions found in ancient Greek and Roman writings (including those of Strabo, Diodorus Siculus and Quintus Curtius Rufus) represented a romantic ideal of an eastern garden; second, that they existed in Babylon but were destroyed sometime around the first century AD; and third, that the legend refers to a well-documented garden that the Assyrian King Sennacherib (704–681 BC) built in his capital city of Nineveh on the River Tigris, near the modern city of Mosul.

Descriptions in classical literature
There are five principal writers whose descriptions of Babylon exist in some form today. These writers concern themselves with the size of the Hanging Gardens, their overall design and means of irrigation, and why they were built.
Josephus (c. 37–100 AD) quotes a description of the gardens by Berossus, a Babylonian priest of Marduk, whose writing c. 290 BC is the earliest known mention of the gardens. Berossus described the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II and is the only source to credit that king with the construction of the Hanging Gardens.

In this palace he erected very high walls, supported by stone pillars; and by planting what was called a pensile paradise, and replenishing it with all sorts of trees, he rendered the prospect an exact resemblance of a mountainous country. This he did to gratify his queen, because she had been brought up in Media, and was fond of a mountainous situation.

Diodorus Siculus (active c. 60–30 BC) seems to have consulted the 4th century BC texts of both Cleitarchus (a historian of Alexander the Great) and Ctesias of Cnidus. Diodorus ascribes the construction to a "Syrian king". He states that the garden was in the shape of a square, with each side approximately four plethra long. The garden was tiered, with the uppermost gallery being 50 cubits high. The walls, 22 feet thick, were made of brick. The bases of the tiered sections were sufficiently deep to provide root growth for the largest trees, and the gardens were irrigated from the nearby Euphrates.
Quintus Curtius Rufus (fl. 1st century AD) probably drew on the same sources as Diodorus. He states that the gardens were located on top of a citadel, which was 20 stadia in circumference. He attributes the building of the gardens to a "Syrian king", again for the reason that his queen missed her homeland.
The account of Strabo (c. 64 BC – 21 AD) possibly based his description on the lost account of Onesicritus from the 4th century BC. He states that the gardens were watered by means of an Archimedes' screw leading to the gardens from the Euphrates river.
The last of the classical sources thought to be independent of the others is A Handbook to the Seven Wonders of the World by the paradoxographer Philo of Byzantium, writing in the 4th to 5th century AD (not to be confused with the earlier engineer of the same name). The method of raising water by screw matches that described by Strabo. Philo praises the engineering and ingenuity of building vast areas of deep soil, which had a tremendous mass, so far above the natural grade of the surrounding land, as well as the irrigation techniques.

Historical existence
It is unclear whether the Hanging Gardens were an actual construction or a poetic creation, owing to the lack of documentation in contemporaneous Babylonian sources. There is also no mention of Nebuchadnezzar's wife Amytis (or any other wives), although a political marriage to a Median or Persian would not have been unusual. Many records exist of Nebuchadnezzar's works, yet his long and complete inscriptions do not mention any garden. However, the gardens were said to still exist at the time that later writers described them, and some of these accounts are regarded as deriving from people who had visited Babylon. Herodotus, who describes Babylon in his Histories, does not mention the Hanging Gardens, although it could be that the gardens were not yet well known to the Greeks at the time of his visit.
To date, no archaeological evidence has been found at Babylon for the Hanging Gardens. It is possible that evidence exists beneath the Euphrates, which cannot be excavated safely at present. The river flowed east of its current position during the time of Nebuchadnezzar II, and little is known about the western portion of Babylon. Rollinger has suggested that Berossus attributed the Gardens to Nebuchadnezzar for political reasons, and that he had adopted the legend from elsewhere.

Identification with Sennacherib's gardens at Nineveh
Oxford scholar Stephanie Dalley has proposed that the Hanging Gardens of Babylon were actually the well-documented gardens constructed by the Assyrian king Sennacherib (reigned 704–681 BC) for his palace at Nineveh; Dalley posits that during the intervening centuries the two sites became confused, and the extensive gardens at Sennacherib's palace were attributed to Nebuchadnezzar II's Babylon. Archaeological excavations have found traces of a vast system of aqueducts attributed to Sennacherib by an inscription on its remains, which Dalley proposes were part of an 80-kilometre (50 mi) series of canals, dams, and aqueducts used to carry water to Nineveh with water-raising screws used to raise it to the upper levels of the gardens.
Dalley bases her arguments on recent developments in the analysis of contemporary Akkadian inscriptions. Her main points are:

The name Babylon, meaning "Gate of the Gods", was the name given to several Mesopotamian cities. Sennacherib renamed the city gates of Nineveh after gods, which suggests that he wished his city to be considered "a Babylon".
Only Josephus names Nebuchadnezzar as the king who built the gardens; although Nebuchadnezzar left many inscriptions, none mentions any garden or engineering works. Diodorus Siculus and Quintus Curtius Rufus specify a "Syrian" king. By contrast, Sennacherib left written descriptions, and there is archaeological evidence of his water engineering. His grandson Assurbanipal pictured the mature garden on a sculptured wall panel in his palace.
Sennacherib called his new palace and garden "a wonder for all peoples". He describes the making and operation of screws to raise water in his garden.
The descriptions of the classical authors fit closely to these contemporary records. Before the Battle of Gaugamela in 331 BC Alexander the Great camped for four days near the aqueduct at Jerwan. The historians who travelled with him would have had ample time to investigate the enormous works around them, recording them in Greek. These first-hand accounts have not survived into modern times, but were quoted by later Greek writers.
King Sennacherib's garden was well-known not just for its beauty – a year-round oasis of lush green in a dusty summer landscape – but also for the marvelous feats of water engineering that maintained the garden. There was a tradition of Assyrian royal garden building. King Ashurnasirpal II (883–859 BC) had created a canal, which cut through the mountains. Fruit tree orchards were planted. Also mentioned were pines, cypresses and junipers, almond trees, date trees, ebony, rosewood, olive, oak, tamarisk, walnut, terebinth, ash, fir, pomegranate, pear, quince, fig, and grapes. A sculptured wall panel of Assurbanipal shows the garden in its maturity. One original panel and the drawing of another are held by the British Museum, although neither is on public display. Several features mentioned by the classical authors are discernible on these contemporary images.

Of Sennacherib's palace, he mentions the massive limestone blocks that reinforce the flood defences. Parts of the palace were excavated by Austin Henry Layard in the mid-19th century. His citadel plan shows contours which would be consistent with Sennacherib's garden, but its position has not been confirmed. The area has been used as a military base in recent times, making it difficult to investigate further.
The irrigation of such a garden demanded an upgraded water supply to the city of Nineveh. The canals stretched over 50 kilometres (31 mi) into the mountains. Sennacherib was proud of the technologies he had employed and describes them in some detail on his inscriptions. At the headwater of Bavian (Khinnis) his inscription mentions automatic sluice gates. An enormous aqueduct crossing the valley at Jerwan was constructed of over two million dressed stones. It used stone arches and waterproof cement. On it is written:

Sennacherib king of the world king of Assyria. Over a great distance I had a watercourse directed to the environs of Nineveh, joining together the waters.... Over steep-sided valleys I spanned an aqueduct of white limestone blocks, I made those waters flow over it.
Sennacherib claimed that he had built a "Wonder for all Peoples", and said he was the first to deploy a new casting technique in place of the "lost-wax" process for his monumental (30 tonne) bronze castings. He was able to bring the water into his garden at a high level because it was sourced from further up in the mountains, and he then raised the water even higher by deploying his new water screws. This meant he could build a garden that towered above the landscape with large trees on the top of the terraces – a stunning artistic effect that surpassed those of his predecessors.

Plants
The gardens, as depicted in artworks, featured blossoming flowers, ripe fruit, burbling waterfalls and terraces exuberant with rich foliage. Based on Babylonian literature, tradition, and the environmental characteristics of the area, some of the following plants may have been found in the gardens:

Olive (Olea europaea)
Quince (Cydonia oblonga)
Common pear (Pyrus communis)
Fig (Ficus carica)
Almond (Prunus dulcis)
Common grape vine (Vitis vinifera)
Date palm (Phoenix dactylifera)
Athel tamarisk (Tamarix aphylla)
Mt. Atlas mastic tree (Pistacia atlantica)
Imported plant varieties that may have been present in the gardens include cedar, cypress, ebony, pomegranate, plum, rosewood, terebinth, juniper, oak, ash tree, fir, myrrh, walnut, and willow. Some of these plants were suspended over the terraces and draped over its walls with arches underneath.

See also
References
Sources
Finkel, Irving (1988). "The Hanging Gardens of Babylon". In Clayton, Peter; Price, Martin (eds.). The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. New York: Routledge. pp. 38 ff. ISBN 0-415-05036-7.
Finkel, Irving L.; Seymour, Michael J., eds. (2008). Babylon. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-538540-3.
Dalley, Stephanie (2013). The Mystery of the Hanging Garden of Babylon: an elusive World Wonder traced. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-966226-5.

Further reading
Dalley, Stephanie. 1994. "Nineveh, Babylon and the Hanging Gardens: Cuneiform and Classical Sources Reconciled." Iraq 56: 45–58. doi:10.2307/4200384.
Higgins, Michael Denis (2023). The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World: Science, Engineering and Technology. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780197648155.
Norwich, John Julius. 2009. The Great Cities In History. London: Thames & Hudson.
Reade, Julian. 2000. "Alexander the Great and the Hanging Gardens of Babylon." Iraq 62: 195–217. doi:10.2307/4200490.

External links

How the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World Work: The Hanging Gardens of Babylon
Plants in the Hanging Gardens of Babylon
Artistic Renditions of the Hanging Gardens and the city of Babylon Archived 22 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Animation of 3D virtual Hanging Gardens of Babylon
The Lost Gardens of Babylon Documentary produced by the PBS Series Secrets of the Dead
3D model of the hanging-gardens-babylon - The Only Progress is Human



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
UR
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:33:29


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 6,151
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ur
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ur ( or ) was a major Sumerian city-state in ancient Mesopotamia, located at the site of modern Tell el-Muqayyar (Arabic: تَلّ ٱلْمُقَيَّر, lit. 'mound of bitumen') in Dhi Qar Governorate, southern Iraq. Although Ur was a coastal city near the mouth of the Euphrates on the Persian Gulf, the coastline has shifted and the site is now well inland, on the south bank of the Euphrates, 16 km (10 mi) southwest of  Nasiriyah in modern-day Iraq. The city dates from the Ubaid period c. 3800 BC, and is recorded in written history as a city-state from the 26th century BC, its first recorded king being Mesannepada.
The city's patron deity was the moon god Nanna (Sin in Akkadian), and the name of the city is derived from UNUGKI, literally "the abode (of Nanna)". The site is marked by the partially restored ruins of the Ziggurat of Ur, which contained the shrine of Nanna, excavated in the 1930s. The temple was built in the 21st century BC (short chronology), during the reign of Ur-Nammu and was reconstructed in the 6th century BC by Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon.

Society and culture
Archaeological discoveries have shown that Ur was a major Sumerian urban center on the Mesopotamian plain. The discovery of Ur's Royal Tombs further confirmed this. These tombs, which date to the Early Dynastic IIIa period (approximately in the 25th or 24th century BC), contained many luxury items made of precious metals and semi-precious stones imported from long distances (Ancient Iran, Afghanistan, India, Asia Minor, the Levant and the Persian Gulf). This immense wealth shows Ur's economic importance during the Early Bronze Age.

Excavation in the old city of Ur in 1929 revealed the Lyres of Ur, instruments similar to the modern harp but in the shape of a bull and with eleven strings.

History
The site consists of a mound, roughly 1200 by 800 metres with a height of about 20 metres above the plain. The mound is split by the remnants of an ancient canal into north and south portions. 
The remains of a city wall are visible surrounding the site. The occupation size ranged from about 15 hectares in the Jemdet Nasr period to 90 hectares in the Early Dynastic period and then peaking in the Ur III period at 108 hectares and the Isin-Larsa period at 140 hectares, extending beyond the city walls. Subsequent period had varying lesser degrees of occupation.

Prehistory
When Ur was founded, it was near the coastline of the Persian Gulf. Ur is thought, therefore, to have had marshy surroundings; irrigation would have been unnecessary, and the city's evident canals likely were used for transportation. Fish, birds, tubers, and reeds might have supported Ur economically without the need for an agricultural revolution sometimes hypothesized as a prerequisite to urbanization.

Prehistoric Ubaid period
Archaeologists have discovered evidence of early occupation at Ur during the Ubaid period (c. 5500–3700 BC), a prehistoric period of Mesopotamia. The name derives from Tell al-'Ubaid where the earliest large excavation of Ubaid period material was conducted initially in 1919 by Henry Hall and later by Leonard Woolley.
Later, a layer of soil covered the occupation levels from the Ubaid period. Excavators of the 1920s interpreted the layer of soil as evidence for the Great Flood of the Epic of Gilgamesh and Book of Genesis. It is now understood that the South Mesopotamian plain was exposed to regular floods from the Euphrates and the Tigris rivers, with heavy erosion from water and wind, which may have given rise to the Mesopotamian and derivative Biblical Great Flood stories.

Early Bronze Age
There are various main sources informing scholars about the importance of Ur during the Early Bronze Age.

Early Dynastic period II
Proto-cuneiform tablets from the Early Dynastic period, c. 2900 BC, have been recovered.

Early Dynastic period III
The First Dynasty of Ur seems to have had great wealth and power, as shown by the lavish remains of the Royal Cemetery at Ur. The Sumerian King List provides a tentative political history of ancient Sumer and mentions, among others, several rulers of Ur. Mesannepada is the first king mentioned in the Sumerian King List, and appears to have lived in the 26th century BC. That Ur was an important urban centre already then seems to be indicated by a type of cylinder seal called the City Seals. These seals contain a set of Proto-Cuneiform signs which appear to be writings or symbols of the name of city-states in ancient Mesopotamia. Many of these seals have been found in Ur, and the name of Ur is prominent on them.

Akkadian period
Ur came under the control of the Semitic-speaking Akkadian Empire (c. 2334–2154 BC) founded by Sargon the Great between the 24th and 22nd centuries BC. This was a period when the Semitic-speaking Akkadians, who had entered Mesopotamia in approximately 3000 BC, gained ascendancy over the Sumerians, and indeed much of the ancient Near East.

Ur III period
After a short period of chaos following the fall of the Akkadian Empire the third Ur dynasty was established when the king Ur-Nammu came to power, ruling between c. 2047 BC and 2030 BC. During his rule, temples, including the Ziggurat of Ur, were built, and agriculture was improved through irrigation. His code of laws, the Code of Ur-Nammu (a fragment was identified in Istanbul in 1952) is one of the oldest such documents known, preceding the Code of Hammurabi by 300 years. He and his successor Shulgi were both deified during their reigns, and after his death he continued as a hero-figure: one of the surviving works of Sumerian literature describes the death of Ur-Nammu and his journey to the underworld.
Ur-Nammu was succeeded by Shulgi, the greatest king of the Third Dynasty of Ur, who solidified the hegemony of Ur and reformed the empire into a highly centralized bureaucratic state. Shulgi ruled for a long time (at least 42 years) and deified himself halfway through his rule.

The Ur empire continued through the reigns of three more kings with Akkadian names, Amar-Sin, Shu-Sin, and Ibbi-Sin. It fell around 1940 BC to the Elamites in the 24th regnal year of Ibbi-Sin, an event commemorated by the Lament for Ur.
According to one estimate, Ur was the largest city in the world from c. 2030 to 1980 BC. Its population was approximately 65,000 (or 0.1 per cent share of global population then).

Middle Bronze Age
The site was occupied in the Isin-Larsa and Old Babylonian periods. The city of Ur lost its political power after the demise of the Third Dynasty of Ur. Nevertheless, its important position which kept on providing access to the Persian Gulf ensured the ongoing economic importance of the city during the second millennium BC. The city came to be ruled by the  Amorite first dynasty of Babylon which rose to prominence in southern Mesopotamia in the 19th century BC. During the Old Babylonian Empire, in the reign of Samsu-iluna, Ur was abandoned. It later became a part of the native Sealand Dynasty for several centuries.

Late Bronze Age
It then came under the control of the Kassites in the 16th century BC, and sporadically under the control of the Middle Assyrian Empire between the 14th and 11th centuries BC.

Iron Age
The city, along with the rest of southern Mesopotamia and much of the Near East, Asia Minor, North Africa and southern Caucasus, fell to the north Mesopotamian Neo-Assyrian Empire from the 10th to late 7th centuries BC. From the end of the 7th century BC Ur was ruled by the so-called Chaldean Dynasty of Babylon. In the 6th century BC there was new construction in Ur under the rule of Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon. The last Babylonian king, Nabonidus, improved the ziggurat. However, the city started to decline from around 530 BC after Babylonia fell to the Persian Achaemenid Empire, and was no longer inhabited by the early 5th century BC. The demise of Ur was perhaps owing to drought, changing river patterns, and the silting of the outlet to the Persian Gulf.

Identification with the Biblical Ur
Ur is possibly the city of Ur Kasdim mentioned in the Book of Genesis as the birthplace of the Jewish patriarch Abraham, traditionally believed to have lived some time in the 2nd millennium BC. There are, however, conflicting traditions and scholarly opinions identifying Ur Kasdim with the sites of Şanlıurfa, Urkesh, Urartu, or Kutha.
The biblical Ur is mentioned four times in the Torah or Hebrew Bible (Tanakh in Hebrew), with the distinction "of the Kasdim"—traditionally rendered in English as "Ur of the Chaldees". The Chaldeans had settled in the vicinity by around 850 BC, but were not extant anywhere in Mesopotamia during the 2nd millennium BC period when Abraham is traditionally held to have lived. The Chaldean dynasty did not rule Babylonia (and thus become the rulers of Ur) until the late 7th century BC, and held power only until the mid 6th century BC. The name is found in Genesis 11:28, Genesis 11:31, and Genesis 15:7. In Nehemiah 9:7, a single passage mentioning Ur is a paraphrase of Genesis.
Pope John Paul II wanted to visit the city according to the biblical tradition as part of his trip to Israel, Jordan and the Palestinian territories but the visit was cancelled due to a dispute between the Government of Saddam Hussein and representatives of the Holy See.
In March 2021, Pope Francis visited Ur during his journey through Iraq.

Archaeology
In 1625, the site was visited by Pietro Della Valle, who recorded the presence of ancient bricks stamped with strange symbols, cemented together with bitumen, as well as inscribed pieces of black marble that appeared to be seals. He retrieved several inscribed bricks. It was visited in 1835 by James Baillie Fraser and John Ross who provided a detailed description. In January 1850 William Loftus and H. A. Churchill visited the site and collected brick inscriptions. European archaeologists did not identify Tell el-Muqayyar as the site of Ur until Henry Rawlinson successfully deciphered some bricks from that location, brought to England by William Loftus.

The site was first excavated, on behalf of the British Museum and with instructions from the Foreign Office, by John George Taylor, British vice consul at Basra in 1853, 1854, and again in 1858. It had long been thought that Taylor only worked at the site in 1853 and 1854 but a 48 page handwritten report of his work there in 1858 has now come to light. Finds from the dig included a carved stone with integral handle, a plaque with woman's face, and a  foundation cone of A'annepada. Taylor uncovered the Ziggurat of Ur and a structure with an arch later identified as part of the "Gate of Judgment". Among the finds were copies of a standard cylinder of Nabonidus, Neo-Babylonian ruler, mentioning the prince regent Belshar-uzur, usually thought to be the Belshazzar of the Book of Daniel in the Hebrew Bible. Between 1854 and 1918 locals excavated over two hundred tablets from the site, mostly from the temple Ê-nun-maḫ, of the moon god Sin. Built by the Ur III ruler Ur-Nammu, the ziggurat was later repaired by Isin ruler Ishme-Dagan early in the 2nd millennium BC. Stamped bricks on the ziggurat detail the rebuilding of the temple of Ningal by 14th century BC Kassite ruler Kurigalzu I.
Some cuneiform tablets were found. Thirty four of these tablets were inadvertently mixed in with those excavated at Kutalla. Only in recent years has this error been recognized. Typical of the era, his excavations destroyed information and exposed the tell. Natives used the now loosened, 4,000-year-old bricks and tile for construction for the next 75 years, while the site lay unexplored, the British Museum having decided to prioritize archaeology in Assyria.
The site was considered rich in remains, and relatively easy to explore. After some soundings were made during a week in 1918 by Reginald Campbell Thompson, H. R. Hall worked the site for one season (using 70 Turkish prisoners of war) for the British Museum in 1919, laying the groundwork for more extensive efforts to follow. Some cuneiform tablets from the Isin-Larsa period were found, including omen and medical texts. They are now in the British Museum.

Excavations from 1922 to 1934 were funded by the British Museum and the University of Pennsylvania and led by the archaeologist Sir Charles Leonard Woolley. The last two seasons focused on closing the site properly. A total of about 1,850 burials were uncovered, including 16 that were described as "royal tombs" containing many valuable artifacts, including the Standard of Ur. Most of the royal tombs were dated to about 2600 BC. The finds included the unlooted tomb of a queen thought to be Queen Puabi (formerly transcribed as Shub-ab), known from a cylinder seal found in the tomb, although there were two other different and unnamed seals found in the tomb. Many other people had been buried with her, in a form of human sacrifice. Near the ziggurat were uncovered the temple E-nun-mah and buildings E-dub-lal-mah (built for a king), E-gi-par (residence of the high priestess) and E-hur-sag (a temple building).
Outside the temple area, many houses used in everyday life were found. Excavations were also made below the royal tombs layer: a 3.5-metre-thick (11 ft) layer of alluvial clay covered the remains of earlier habitation, including pottery from the Ubaid period, the first stage of settlement in southern Mesopotamia. Woolley later wrote many articles and books about the discoveries. One of Woolley's assistants on the site was the British archaeologist Max Mallowan.

A number of royal inscriptions were found during the Woolley excavations. Numerous cuneiform tablets were also recovered. These included archives, temple and domestic, from the Early Dynastic and Sargonic periods, the Ur III period, Old and Middle Babylonian period, and the Neo-Babylonian and Persian periods. Many literary and religious texts were also recovered.
The discoveries at the site reached the headlines in mainstream media in the world with the discoveries of the Royal Tombs. As a result, the ruins of the ancient city attracted many visitors. One of these visitors was the already famous Agatha Christie, who as a result of this visit ended up marrying Max Mallowan. During this time the site was accessible from the Baghdad–Basra railway, from a stop called "Ur Junction".
In 2009, an agreement was reached for a joint University of Pennsylvania and Iraqi team to resume archaeological work at the site of Ur. Excavations began in 2015 under the direction of Elizabeth C Stone and Paul Zimansky of the State University of New York. In part of the section they planned to work (designated AH) they found that a large area had been leveled to build a modern reconstruction of the fictional "House of Abraham" and another area have been paved over for a Papal visit. The first excavation season was primarily to re-excavate Woolley's work in an Old Babylonian housing area with two new trenches for confirmation. Among the finds were a cylinder seal and balance pan weights.  A number of cuneiform tablets were unearthed, a few Ur III period, a few from the Isin-Larsa period (including one from Rim-Sîn I year 24), a few Old Babylonian period, and a number of Old Akkadian period. A similar though smaller dig was made in a Neo-Babylonian housing area.
 In the 2017 season an urban area adjacent to Wooleys very large AH area was excavated. The burial vault of a Babylonian general Abisum was found. Abisum is known from year 36 of Hammurabi into the reign of Samsu-iluna. Thirty cuneiform tablets were found around the vault and another 12 inside the tomb itself. A 3rd excavation season was conducted in 2019 (the University of Pennsylvania excavated in 2023 though nothing has yet been published of that work). A notable find was a large cuneiform tablet dated to the 6th year of Ur III ruler Ibbi-Sin on the swap of two large residences between private individuals (Munimah and Gayagama). One home was about 240 square meters and the other 423 square meters which is especially large for a home in that time.
Some distance south of Area AH in 2017 and 2019 a German team of Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München directed by Adelheid Otto excavated a large home of Sîn-nādā (mid 19th century BC) chief administrator of the Temple of Ningal in the Isin-Larsa period. In levels below the final occupation were found tablets dating to Sin-Eribam and Silli-Adad, rulers of Larsa. They included a new copy of the Lament for Sumer and Ur.

The Royal Tomb Excavation
When the Royal Tombs at Ur were discovered, their size was unknown. Excavators started digging two trenches in the middle of the desert to see if they could find anything that would allow them to keep digging. They split into two teams – A and team B. Both teams spent the first few months digging a trench and found evidence of burial grounds by collecting small pieces of golden jewelry and pottery. This was called the "gold trench". After the first season of digging finished, Woolley returned to England. In Autumn, Woolley returned and started the second season. By the end of the second season, he had uncovered a courtyard surrounded by many rooms. In their third season of digging archaeologists had uncovered their biggest find yet, a building that was believed to have been constructed by order of the king, and a second building thought to be where the high priestess lived. As the fourth and fifth season came to a close, they had discovered so many items that most of their time was now spent recording the objects they found instead of actually digging objects. Items included gold jewelry, clay pots and stones. One of the most significant objects was the Standard of Ur. By the end of their sixth season they had excavated 1850 burial sites and deemed 17 of them to be "Royal Tombs". Some clay sealings and cuneiform tablet fragment were found in an underlying layer.
Woolley finished his work excavating the Royal Tombs in 1934, uncovering a series of burials. Many servants were killed and buried with the royals, who he believed went to their deaths willingly. Computerized tomography scans on some of the surviving skulls have shown signs that they were killed by blows to the head that could be from the spiked end of a copper axe, which showed Woolley's initial theory of mass suicide via poison to be incorrect.

Inside Puabi's tomb there was a chest in the middle of the room. Underneath that chest was a hole in the ground that led to what was called the "King's Grave": PG-789. It was believed to be the king's grave because it was buried next to the queen. In this grave, there were 63 attendants who were all equipped with copper helmets and swords. It is thought to be his army buried with him. Another large room was uncovered, PG-1237, called the "Great death pit". This large room had 74 bodies, 68 of which were women. This was based on artifacts found with the bodies, weapons and whetstones in the case of males and simple, non-gold, jewelry in the case of females. There is some debate about the gender of one body. Two large ram statues were found in PG-1237 which are believed to be the remains of lyres. Several lyres were found just outside the entrance. The bodies were found to have perimortem blunt force injuries which caused their death. They also had skeleton markers for long term manual labor.
Most of the treasures excavated at Ur are in the British Museum, the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology and the Baghdad Museum. At the Penn Museum the exhibition "Iraq's Ancient Past", which includes many of the most famous pieces from the Royal Tombs, opened to visitors in late Spring 2011. Previously, the Penn Museum had sent many of its best pieces from Ur on tour in an exhibition called "Treasures From the Royal Tombs of Ur." It traveled to eight American museums, including those in Cleveland, Washington and Dallas, ending the tour at the Detroit Institute of Art in May 2011.
Samples from two stratigraphic layers in the royal cemetery area, from before the royal burials, have been radiocarbon dated. The ED Ia layer dated to c. 2900 BC and the ED Ic layer to c. 2679 BC.

Current status and preservation
Though some of the areas that were cleared during modern excavations have sanded over again, the Great Ziggurat is fully cleared and stands as the best-preserved and most visible landmark at the site. The famous Royal tombs, also called the Neo-Sumerian Mausolea, located about 250 metres (820 ft) south-east of the Great Ziggurat in the corner of the wall that surrounds the city, are nearly totally cleared. Parts of the tomb area appear to be in need of structural consolidation or stabilization.
There are cuneiform (Sumerian writing) on many walls, some entirely covered in script stamped into the mud-bricks. The text is sometimes difficult to read, but it covers most surfaces. Modern graffiti has also found its way to the graves, usually in the form of names made with coloured pens (sometimes they are carved).
The Great Ziggurat itself has far more graffiti, mostly lightly carved into the bricks. The graves are completely empty. A small number of the tombs are accessible. Most of them have been cordoned off. The whole site is covered with pottery debris, to the extent that it is virtually impossible to set foot anywhere without stepping on some. Some have colours and paintings on them. Some of the "mountains" of broken pottery are debris that has been removed from excavations.
Pottery debris and human remains form many of the walls of the royal tombs area. In May 2009, the United States Army returned the Ur site to the Iraqi authorities, who hope to develop it as a tourist destination.

Since 2009, the non-profit organization Global Heritage Fund (GHF) has been working to protect and preserve Ur against the problems of erosion, neglect, inappropriate restoration, war and conflict. GHF's stated goal for the project is to create an informed and scientifically grounded Master Plan to guide the long-term conservation and management of the site, and to serve as a model for the stewardship of other sites.
Since 2013, the institution for Development Cooperation of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs DGCS and the SBAH, the State Board of Antiquities and Heritage of the Iraqi Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, have started a cooperation project for "The Conservation and Maintenance of Archaeological site of UR". In the framework of this cooperation agreement, the executive plan, with detailed drawings, is in progress for the maintenance of the Dublamah Temple (design concluded, works starting), the Royal Tombs—Mausolea 3rd Dynasty (in progress)—and the Ziqqurat (in progress). The first updated survey in 2013 has produced a new aerial map derived by the flight of a UAV (unmanned aerial vehicle) operated in March 2014. This is the first high-resolution map, derived from more than 100 aerial photograms, with an accuracy of 20 cm or less. A preview of the ortho-photomap of Archaeological Site of Ur is available online.

Tell Sakhariya
The site (30º 58’ 33.84” N by 46º 08’ 28.36” E) was first noted, as Tell Abu Ba’arura Shimal ("Father of Sheep Droppings, North"), as a Kassite period occupation (300 NE X 150 X 2.5. Cassite: 3.5 ha) during an archaeological survey of the region in the 1960s. The site, which lies 6.45 kilometers northeast of Ur, was excavated in a five week season from December to January 2011 – 2012 by a joint Iraqi State Board of Antiquities and Heritage and the State University of New York at Stony Brook team led by Elizabeth Stone and Paul Zimansky. It was measured at about 250 meters by 200 meters with two high points, about 3.5 meters above the plain, separated by a saddle. Seven trenches were dug, some small, and three yielded simple slope wash. On the surface were found Kassite and Old Babylonian period ceramics and satellite imagery suggested the presence of a large square building and a number of other walls but the excavators found no building remains in surface or magnetic gradiometry surveys, or in the later trenches. Three occupational levels were determined. The top layer contained Kassite pottery fragments, a late Kassite kiln, and a number of late Kassite burials. The second held Sealand Dynasty ceramics along with lithic (grinding stones, cuboids and one balance weight), metal, floral and faunal (primarily cattle, sheep, and goats) remains. The excavators deemed the occupations to be repeated but transient. Neither level showed signs of formal or residential architecture.
The final, earliest level also lacked notable architecture but featured a very large mud or clay platform, made from clean material, devoid of sherds, bones, or other living debris. Coring to a depth of 4 meters (1 meter below the plain) failed to find the bottom of the platform. Part of the platform is underlain by a square baked brick pavement and remains of a fish pond were found. Two 5 meter by 10 meter trenches, 55 meters apart, were excavated in this platform. An inscribed brick of the first Ur III ruler Ur-Nammu (c. 2112-2094 BC) "describing the construction of a barag - a pedestal or podium and a garden" was found out of context. Also found were four fragmentary inscribed bricks (surface finds), three inscribed cones (one datable to Larsa ruler Rim-Sîn I (c. 1822-1763 BC) year 15), and two Sumerian language cuneiform tablets. One tablet was from the early Kassite period and the other tablet was a receipt for copper utensils is dated to year 28 of Ur III ruler Shulgi (c. 2094-2046  BC). After this
excavation season a nearby prison was expanded by the Iraqi government blocking access to the site and precluding further campaigns. It has been proposed as the site of Ur III Ga’eš. The ziggurat at Ur can be seen from the summit of the site.

Ga’eš
Based on the archaeology the site of Tell Sakhariya has been proposed as the Ur III period city of Ga’eš (ga-eški and ga-eš5ki), site of the Akiti festival of Nanna/Sin, held every year for 11 days in the seventh month of the year and 7 days in the first month of the year. The festival began at Nanna’s temple in Ur and ended in Ga’eš, possibly traveling via a canal. The temple of Nanna/Sin there was called the Karzida (kar-zi-da) was located at Ga’eš (the names Karzida and Ga’eš appear to have been used interchangeably for the city). The 36th year name  of Ur III ruler Shulgi read "Year Nanna of Ga’eš was brought into his temple" and the 9th year name of Ur III ruler Amar-Sin read "Year En-Nanna-Amar-Sin-kiagra, was installed for the third time as en-priestess of Nanna of Ga’eš / of Karzida". Amar-Sin established a Giparu (nunnery) for the en-priestess of Nanna at Karzida saying "he caused En-aga-zi-ana, his  beloved  priestess (en),  to enter there". When the en-priestess died she was buried a with "golden crown (aga), which  is followed by five other golden objects". From tablets found at Ur it is known that wrestling competitions were held at Ga’eš reading "for the ‘house of wrestling’ in the Akiti (building), issued in Ga’eš, during the Akiti month" and "100 liters of ordinary beer, the beer for the ‘house of wrestling’ … issued in Ga’eš", for example. All that is known with certainty about its location is that it lay one day's journey from Ur and was on a canal. A sketch in a 1990's paper concerning the Iturungal canal placed Ga’eš in a location corresponding to Tell Sakhariya. It has been suggested that Ga’eš was mentioned in Early Dynastic II period administrative texts. The final textual mention of was from the time of Larsa ruler Sin-Iddinam (c. 1849-1843 BC) a cone reading "Sm-i[ddinam], mighty man, [s]on [born] in Ga’eš  provider  of U[r], king of Lars[a], king of the land of S[umer] and Akkad] ...". Apparently Ga’eš had a gate tower based on a text from Drehem "1 fattened sheep for the great gate tower in Ga’eš" dating to the reign of Su-Sin.
One of the Temple Hymns of Enheduanna, the daughter of Sargon of Akkad (c. 2334-2279 BC), is dedicated to Ga’eš and the Karzida temple of Nanna/Sin there.

"Shrine, great sanctuary?, founded at a cattle-pen, ‘Small’ city, . . . . of  Suen Karzida, your interior is a . . . . place, your foundation is holy and clean, Shrine, your Gipar is founded in purity, Your door is (of) strong copper, set up at a great place, Cattle-pen (filled with) the lowing (of  the cows), like a young bull you . . . the horn,Your prince, the lord of  heaven, standing in the . . . ., At noon (like the sun) radiating . .  . ., O Karzida, he, Ašimbabbar, has placed the house upon your . . . . has taken his place on your dais. The house of Nanna in Ga’eš"
Ga’eš was also mentioned in the Sumerian literary composition Lament for Sumer and Ur

"... Mighty strength was set against the banks of the Id-nuna-Nanna canal. The settlements of the E-danna of Nanna, like substantial cattle-pens, were destroyed. Their refugees, like stampeding goats, were chased (?) by dogs. They destroyed Gaeš like milk poured out to dogs,  and shattered its finely fashioned statues. 'Alas, the destroyed city, my destroyed house,' Its sacred Ĝipar of en priesthood was defiled. Its en priestess was snatched from the Ĝipar and carried off to enemy territory. A lament was raised at the dais that stretches out toward heaven. Its heavenly throne was not set up, was not fit to be crowned (?)."
And in another composition:

"O, sanctuary, big chamber built like ? a stall, mighty beaming city of Suen, Karzida, your interior is a powerful place, your foundation is holy and clean. O, sanctuary, your Ĝipar is established in purity, your door is copper, something (very) strong, established in the Underworld. O, cattle-pen, which rai[ses] the horns like a breeding bull, your prince, the lord of heaven standing in ... joy. ... at midday and ... O Karzida, Ašimbabbar, a house has established in your holy space and took (his) residence in your sanctuary!"

List of rulers
The Sumerian King List (SKL) gives a list of only thirteen rulers from three dynasties of Ur. The once supposed second dynasty of Ur may have never existed. The first dynasty of Ur may have been preceded by one other dynasty of Ur (the "Kalam dynasty") unnamed on the SKL—which had extensive influence over the area of Sumer and apparently led a union of south Mesopotamian polities. This predynastic period of Ur may include at least two rulers out of the first eight on this list (Meskalamdug and Akalamdug). The following list should not be considered complete:

See also
Correspondence of the Kings of Ur
History of Iraq
History of Sumer
List of cities of the ancient Near East
Lyres of Ur
Ram in a Thicket
Royal Game of Ur
Short chronology
Tal Abu Tbeirah

Notes
References
Further reading
[17] Benati, Giacomo, "Re-modeling political economy in early 3rd millennium BC Mesopotamia: patterns of socio-economic organization in Archaic Ur (Tell al-Muqayyar, Iraq)", Cuneiform Digital Library Journal 2015.2, 2015
Benati, Giacomo, "The Beginning of the Early Dynastic Period at Ur", Iraq, vol. 76, 2014, pp. 1–17, 2014
Black, J. and Spada, G., "Texts from Ur: Kept in the Iraq Museum and the British Museum.", Nisaba 19, Messina: Dipartimento di Scienze dell’Antichitá 2008 ISBN 9788882680107
[18] Chambon, Grégory "Archaic metrological systems from Ur", Cuneiform Digital Library Journal 2003.5, 2003
D. Charpin, "Le Clergé d'Ur au siècle d'Hammurabi (XIXe-XVIIIe siècles av. J.-C.)", HEO 22, Geneva-Paris, 1986
D. Charpin, "Le pillage d'Ur et la protection du temple de Ningal en l'an 12 de Samsu-iluna", in: D. Charpin (ed.), Archibab 4. Nouvelles recherches sur la ville d'Ur à l'époque paléo babylonienne, Mémoires de NABU 22, Paris, 2019
Charvát, Petr, "Signs from Silence: Ur of the First Sumerians (Late Uruk Through ED I)", Ur in the Twenty-First Century CE: Proceedings of the 62nd Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale at Philadelphia, July 11–15, 2016, edited by Grant Frame, Joshua Jeffers and Holly Pittman, University Park, USA: Penn State University Press, pp. 195–204, 2021
Crawford, Harriet, "Ur: The City of the Moon God", London: Bloomsbury, 2015. ISBN 978-1-47252-419-5
D’Agostino, F., Pomponio, F., and Laurito, R., "Neo-Sumerian Texts from Ur in the British Museum.", Nisaba 5, Messina: Dipartimento di Scienze dell’Antichitá, 2004 ISBN 9788882680107
C. J. Gadd, "History and monuments of Ur, Chatto & Windus", 1929 (Dutton 1980 reprint: ISBN 0-405-08545-1).
[19] Leon Legrain, "Archaic seal-impressions", Ur Excavations III, Publications of the Joint Expedition of the British Museum and of the University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, to Mesopotamia, Oxford University Press, 1936
[20] Leon Legrain, "Seal cylinders", Ur Excavations X, Publications of the Joint Expedition of the British Museum and of the University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, to Mesopotamia, Oxford University Press, 1951
P. R. S. Morrey, "Where Did They Bury the Kings of the IIIrd Dynasty of Ur?", Iraq, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 1984.
[21] P.R.S. Morrey, "What Do We Know About the People Buried in the Royal Cemetery?", Expedition Magazine, Penn Museum, vol. 20, iss. 1, pp. 24–40, 1977
[22]Notizia, Palmiro, "The Burial Pit of the ensi₂ of Gizuna (ŠID. NUNki) and the Cemetery of Ur Between the Late Early Dynastic and Early Sargonic Periods", KASKAL, pp. 23-32, 2024
J. Oates, "Ur and Eridu: The Prehistory", Iraq, vol. 22, pp. 32–50, 1960.
Pardo Mata, Pilar, "Ur, ciudad de los sumerios". Cuenca: Alderaban, 2006. ISBN 978-84-95414-38-0.
Susan Pollock, "Chronology of the Royal Cemetery of Ur",  Iraq, vol. 47, pp. 129–158, British Institute for the Study of Iraq, 1985
Susan Pollock, "Of Priestesses, Princes and Poor Relations: The Dead in the Royal Cemetery of Ur", Cambridge Archaeological Journal, vol. 1, iss. 2, 1991
Wencel, M. M., "New radiocarbon dates from southern Mesopotamia (Fara and Ur)", Iraq, 80, pp. 251–261, 2018
[23] Woolley, Leonard, "The Royal Cemetery: a report on the predynastic and Sargonid graves excavated between 1926 and 1931", Ur Excavations II, Publications of the Joint Expedition of the British Museum and of the University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, to Mesopotamia, Oxford University Press, 1927
[24] Woolley, Leonard, "The early periods: a report on the sites and objects prior in date to the third dynasty of Ur discovered in the course of the excavations", Ur excavations IV,  London : Published for the Trustees of the Two Museums, Oxford University Press, 1955
[25] Woolley, Leonard, "The Ziggurat and Its Surroundings", Ur Excavations V, Oxford University Press, 1939
[26] Woolley, Leonard, "The buildings of the third dynasty", Ur Excavations VI, London : Published for the Trustees of the Two Museums, 1974
[27] Woolley, Leonard and with M.E.L. Mallowan, "The Old Babylonian Period", Ur Excavations VII, Oxford University Press, 1976
[28] Woolley, Leonard, "The Kassite period and the period of the Assyrian kings", Ur Excavations VIII, London : Published for the Trustees of the Two Museums, 1965
[29] Woolley, Leonard and M.E.L. Mallowan, "The Neo-Babylonian and Persian Periods", Ur Excavations IX,  London : Published for the Trustees of the Two Museums, 1962
[30] Woolley, Leonard, "Ur of the Chaldees: A record of seven years of excavation", Ernest Benn Limited, 1920
C. L. Woolley, "The Excavations at Ur, 1923–1924", Antiquaries Journal 5, pp. 1–20, 1925
C. L. Woolley, "The Excavations at Ur, 1924–1925", Antiquaries Journal 5, pp. 347–402, 1925
C. L. Woolley, "The Excavations at Ur, 1925–1926", Antiquaries Journal 6, pp. 365–401, 1926
C. L. Woolley, "The Excavations at Ur, 1926–1927", Antiquaries Journal 7, pp. 385–423, 1927
C. L. Woolley, "Excavations at Ur, 1927–1928", Antiquaries Journal 8, pp. 415–448, 1928
C. L. Woolley, "Excavations at Ur, 1928–1929", Antiquaries Journal 9, pp. 305–343, 1929
C. L. Woolley, "Excavations at Ur, 1929–1930", Antiquaries Journal 10, pp. 315–343 and pl. XXVIII, 1930
C. L. Woolley, "Excavations at Ur, 1930–1931", Antiquaries Journal 11, pp. 343–381, 1931
C. L. Woolley, "Excavations at Ur, 1931–1932", Antiquaries Journal 12, pp. 355–392 and pl. LVIII, 1932

External links

City of the Moon New Excavations at Ur – Penn Museum – 2017
An exploration of the Royal Tombs of Ur, with a comprehensive selection of high-resolution photographs detailing the treasures found in the tombs
Explore some of the Royal Tombs, Mesopotamia website from the British Museum
Treasures from the Royal Tombs of Ur Archived 2008-12-17 at the Wayback Machine
British Museum and Penn Museum Ur site – has field reports
Jewish Encyclopedia: Ur
Woolley’s Ur Revisited, Richard L. Zettler, BAR 10:05, September/October 1984.
Ur Excavations of the University of Pennsylvania Museum
At Ur, Ritual Deaths That Were Anything but Serene on The New York Times


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 334
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/UR
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

== Sigle ou code ==

Sigle
Le sigle UR peut signifier :

Underground Resistance, un label de musique électronique de Détroit ;
Union républicaine  ;
unité de recherche ;
Universal Rocket, une famille de missiles balistiques et de lanceurs soviétiques puis russes ;
université de La Réunion ;
université du Rwanda.

Code
Le code UR peut faire référence :

au canton d'Uri, un canton suisse (norme ISO 3166-2) ;
à l'ourdou, une langue (norme ISO 639-1) ;
à l'Union soviétique, selon la liste des codes pays utilisés par l'OTAN, code alpha-2 (désuet depuis 1992).

Sciences et techniques
Astronomie et planétologie
(22260) Ur est un astéroïde de la ceinture principale.

Sciences de la Terre
Ur est un paléocontinent, formé il y a 3 milliards d'années.

Sciences humaines et sociales
Histoire
Ur est une cité antique de Mésopotamie, très puissante au IIIe millénaire av. J.-C..
Le jeu royal d'Ur est un jeu antique de dés. Il tient son nom d'un exemplaire découvert dans la cité d'Ur et du fait qu'il était pratiqué par les hauts dignitaires sumériens.
Ur est un roi alaman qui a régné au IVe siècle.

Linguistique
Ur est le mot basque pour « eau ».
Úr est le nom de la lettre ᚒ de l'alphabet oghamique.
Ur est le nom anglo-saxon de la rune ᚢ du Futhorc.
Úr est le nom vieux norrois de cette même rune.
« u r » est une abréviation de l'anglais you are (« tu es ») en langage SMS.

Culture et société
Édition
Ur est le titre d'une revue lettriste dirigée par Maurice Lemaître, dont le premier numéro est paru en 1950.

Littérature
Ur est une nouvelle de Stephen King.

Musique
UR est un des six sous-groupes du groupe musical Secret Chiefs 3, aux tendances surf rock et krautrock.
Ur est une composition du compositeur contemporain finlandais Magnus Lindberg.

Toponyme
Ur est un nom de lieu notamment porté  par :

Ur, une commune des Pyrénées-Orientales, en France ;
Ur, l'une des plus anciennes cités de l'actuel Irak.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 362
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Ur
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Nasiriyah is a city in Southern Iraq. It is the closest major settlement to the prehistoric city of Ur.

## Understand
Nasiriyah was founded in 1872 and became a major center of trade in Ottoman Iraq. The areas around the city is the ancestral home of many Mandaeans, an  ethnoreligious group that were probably the first to practice baptism and are the last surviving Gnostics from antiquity. Today, only a few hundred families remain.

## Get in
Nasiriyah has a station on the railway between Baghdad and Basra. Iraqi Republic Railways runs two overnight trains which both call here. There are also irregular trains to and from Karbala, especially during religious holidays.
31.023546.231 Nasiriyah railway station (South of city centre, at the end of Al-Mustafa street).    (updated Jul 2021)

## See
There is a  UNESCO World Heritage Site called The Ahwar of Southern Iraq: Refuge of Biodiversity and the Relict Landscape of the Mesopotamian Cities. "Ahwar" translates as "marshland" and the region is listed partly for the wetlands flora and fauna. However, the listing also includes several cities of ancient Sumer.
31.04700446.2372681 Museum of Nasiriyah. The second largest museum in Iraq, housing a large collection of Sumerian, Assyrian, Babylonian, and Abbasid artifacts.    (updated Jul 2016)
30.96222246.1044442 Ruins of Ur. The historical city of Ur, one of the most important cities during the Sumerian era. Includes the partly restored Great Ziggurat. Large parts of the city have been damaged.      (updated Jul 2016)
30.82591345.9947313 Ruins of Tell Eridu. A smaller archaeological site containing the city of Eridu, another Sumerian city, possibly the oldest recorded city in the world.      (updated Mar 2019)
31.28583345.8536114 Ruins of Larsa. Ruins of the historic city of Larsa, the city peaked in its influence around 1750-1700 BC.   (updated Jul 2021)

## Eat
31.0386746.234511 Mandi Palace Restaurant, in Shamiyah. Daily 9AM-10PM. good if you're wanting to try some Arabic dishes like mandi, a Yemeni concoction of meat and rice and spices cooked underground. (May 2022).

## Sleep
31.0486446.23941 Al-Zaitoon Hotel (فندق الزيتون), Al Nahr Street, ☏ +964 780 006 6155. $90 (May 2022).

## Go next
The ruins of the ancient cities of Ur and Larsa are located nearby.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
GREAT ZIGGURAT OF UR
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:33:38


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 671
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ziggurat_of_Ur
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Ziggurat (or Great Ziggurat) of Ur (Sumerian: 𒂍𒋼𒅎𒅍 é-temen-ní-gùru "Etemenniguru", meaning "house whose foundation creates terror") is a Neo-Sumerian ziggurat in what was the city of Ur near Nasiriyah, in present-day Dhi Qar Province, Iraq. The structure was built during the Early Bronze Age (21st century BC) by King Ur-Nammu of the Third Dynasty of Ur. It had crumbled to ruins by the 6th century BC of the Neo-Babylonian period, when it was restored by King Nabonidus.
Its remains were excavated in the 1920s and 1930s by international teams led by Sir Leonard Woolley. Under Saddam Hussein in the 1980s, they were encased by a partial reconstruction of the façade and the monumental staircase. The Ziggurat of Ur is the best-preserved of those known from Mesopotamia, besides the ziggurat of Dur Untash (Chogha Zanbil). It is one of three well-preserved structures of the Neo-Sumerian city of Ur, along with the Royal Mausolea and the Palace of Ur-Nammu (the E-hursag).

Sumerian ziggurat
The ziggurat was built by King Ur-Nammu, who dedicated it in honour of Nanna/Sîn in approximately the 21st century BC (short chronology) during the Third Dynasty of Ur. The massive step pyramid measured 64 m (210 ft) in length, 45 m (148 ft) in width and over 30 m (98 ft) in height. The height is speculative, as only the foundations of the Sumerian ziggurat have survived.
The ziggurat was a piece in a temple complex that served as an administrative center for the city, and which was a shrine of the moon god Nanna, the patron deity of Ur.
The construction of the ziggurat was finished in the 21st century BC by King Shulgi, who, in order to win the allegiance of cities, proclaimed himself a god. During his 48-year reign, the city of Ur grew to be the capital of a state controlling much of Mesopotamia.

Neo-Babylonian restoration
King Nabonidus, the last king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire in the 6th century BC, after "finding little left but the last stage and nothing to guide him as to the monument's original appearance", had it restored in seven stages rather than three.

Excavation and preservation
The remains of the ziggurat were rediscovered by William Loftus in 1850. The first excavations at the site were conducted by John Taylor (mistakenly credited as "J. E. Taylor") in the 1850s, leading to the identification of the site as Ur.
After World War I, preliminary excavations were performed by Reginald Thompson and Henry Hall. The site was extensively excavated in the 1920s by Sir Leonard Woolley by appointment of the University Museum of the University of Pennsylvania and the British Museum in the period of 1922 to 1934.
The remains of the ziggurat consist of a three-layered solid mass of  mud brick faced with burnt bricks set in bitumen. The lowest layer corresponds to the original construction of Ur-Nammu, while the two upper layers are part of the Neo-Babylonian restorations. The façade of the lowest level and the monumental staircase were rebuilt under the orders of Saddam Hussein.
The rebuilt ziggurat was damaged in the Gulf War in 1991 by small arms fire, and the structure was shaken by explosions. Four bomb craters can be seen nearby, and the walls of the ziggurat are marred by over 400 bullet holes.

As of 2008, the site was under the supervision of curator Dief Mohssein Naiif al-Gizzy.

Gallery
See also
Abraham
Nasiriyah Airport
Abraham and the temple in Islamic tradition
Ennigaldi-Nanna's museum
Architecture of Mesopotamia
Ur of the Chaldees
Ziggurat of Aqar Quf

References
Further reading
Woolley, C. Leonard and Moorey, P. R. S., Ur of the Chaldees: Revised and Updated Edition of Sir Leonard Woolley's Excavations at Ur, Cornell University Press (1982).

External links

Ziggurat of Ur Archived 27 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Smarthistory at Khan Academy
Ur (modern name: Tell el-Muqayyar) at Open Context
A brief history of the Sumerian Ziggurat at Ur Archived 27 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine
Archaeology of ancient Iraq with a section on the ziggurat



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
URUK
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:33:46


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 4,374
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uruk
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Uruk, the archeological site known today as Warka, was an ancient city in the Near East or West Asia, located east of the current bed of the Euphrates River, on an ancient, now-dried channel of the river in Muthanna Governorate, Iraq. The site lies 93 kilometers (58 miles) northwest of ancient Ur, 108 kilometers (67 miles) southeast of ancient Nippur, and 24 kilometers (15 miles) northwest of ancient Larsa. It is 30 km (19 mi) east of modern Samawah.
Uruk is the type site for the Uruk period. Uruk played a leading role in the early urbanization of Sumer in the mid-4th millennium BC.
By the final phase of the Uruk period around 3100 BC, the city may have had 40,000 residents, with 80,000–90,000 people living in its environs, making it the largest urban area in the world at the time. Gilgamesh, according to the chronology presented in the Sumerian King List (SKL), ruled Uruk in the 27th century BC. After the end of the Early Dynastic period, with the rise of the Akkadian Empire, the city lost its prime importance. It had periods of florescence during the Isin-Larsa period, Neo-Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian periods and throughout the Achaemenid (550–330 BC), Seleucid (312–63 BC) and Parthian (227 BC to AD 224) periods, until it was finally abandoned shortly before or after the Islamic conquest of 633–638.
William Kennett Loftus visited the site of Uruk in 1849, identifying it as "Erech", known as "the second city of Nimrod", and led the first excavations from 1850 to 1854. In myth and literature, Uruk was famous as the capital city of Gilgamesh, hero of the Epic of Gilgamesh. Biblical scholars identify Uruk as the biblical Erech (Genesis 10:10), the second city founded by Nimrod in Shinar.

Toponymy
Uruk () has several spellings in cuneiform; in Sumerian it is 𒀕𒆠 unugᵏⁱ; in Akkadian, 𒌷𒀕 or 𒌷𒀔 Uruk (URUUNUG). Its names in other languages include: Arabic: وركاء or أوروك, Warkāʾ or Auruk; Classical Syriac: ܐܘܿܪܘܿܟ, ʾÚrūk; Biblical Hebrew: אֶרֶךְ‎ ʾÉreḵ; Ancient Greek: Ὀρχόη, romanized: Orkhóē, Ὀρέχ Orékh, Ὠρύγεια Ōrúgeia.

History
According to the SKL, Uruk was founded by the king Enmerkar. Though the king-list mentions a father before him, the epic Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta relates that Enmerkar constructed the House of Heaven (Sumerian: e₂-anna; cuneiform: 𒂍𒀭 E₂.AN) for the goddess Inanna in the Eanna District of Uruk. In the Epic of Gilgamesh, Gilgamesh builds the city wall around Uruk and is king of the city.
Uruk went through several phases of growth, from the Early Uruk period (4000–3500 BC) to the Late Uruk period (3500–3100 BC). The city was formed when two smaller Ubaid settlements developed into the cities of Unug and Kullaba and later merged to become Uruk. The temple complexes at their cores became the Eanna District (Unug) dedicated to Inanna and the "Anu" District of Kullaba.
The Eanna District was composed of several buildings with spaces for workshops, and it was walled off from the city. By contrast, the Anu District was built on a terrace with a temple at the top. It is clear Eanna was dedicated to Inanna from the earliest Uruk period throughout the history of the city. The rest of the city was composed of typical courtyard houses, grouped by profession of the occupants, in districts around Eanna and Anu. Uruk was extremely well penetrated by a canal system that has been described as "Venice in the desert". This canal system flowed throughout the city connecting it with the maritime trade on the ancient Euphrates River as well as the surrounding agricultural belt.
The original city of Uruk was situated southwest of the ancient Euphrates River, now dry. Currently, the site of Warka is northeast of the modern Euphrates river. The change in position was caused by a shift in the Euphrates at some point in history, which, together with salination due to irrigation, may have contributed to the decline of Uruk.

Uruk period
In addition to being one of the first cities, Uruk was the main force of urbanization and state formation during the Uruk period, or 'Uruk expansion' (4000–3200 BC). This period of 800 years saw a shift from small, agricultural villages to a larger urban center with a full-time bureaucracy, military, and stratified society. Although other settlements coexisted with Uruk, they were generally about 10 hectares while Uruk was significantly larger and more complex. The Uruk period culture exported by Sumerian traders and colonists had an effect on all surrounding peoples, who gradually evolved their own comparable, competing economies and cultures. Ultimately, Uruk could not maintain long-distance control over colonies such as Tell Brak by military force.

Early Dynastic, Akkadian, Ur III, and Old Babylonian period
Dynastic categorizations are described solely from the Sumerian King List, which is of problematic historical accuracy; the organization might be analogous to Manetho's.
In 2009, two different copies of an inscription were put forth as evidence of a 19th-century BC ruler of Uruk named Naram-sin.
Uruk continued as principality of Ur, Babylon, and later Achaemenid, Seleucid, and Parthian Empires. It enjoyed brief periods of independence during the Isin-Larsa period, under kings such as (possibly Ikūn-pî-Ištar, Sumu-binasa, Alila-hadum, and Naram-Sin), Sîn-kāšid, his son Sîn-irībam, his son Sîn-gāmil, Ilum-gāmil, brother of Sîn-gāmil, Etēia, AN-am3 (Dingiram), ÌR3-ne-ne (Irdanene), who was defeated by Rīm-Sîn I of Larsa in his year 14 (c. 1740 BC), Rîm-Anum and Nabi-ilīšu.
It is known that during the time of Ilum-gāmil a temple was built for the god Iškur (Hadad) based on a clay cone inscription reading "For the god Iškur, lord, fearsome splendour of heaven and  earth, his lord, for the life of Ilum-gāmil, king of Uruk, son of Sîn-irībam, Ubar-Adad, his  servant, son of Apil-Kubi, built the Esaggianidu, ('House  — whose closing is good'), the residence of his office of en, and thereby  made  it truly befitting his own li[fe]".

Uruk into Late Antiquity
Although it had been a thriving city in Early Dynastic Sumer, especially Early Dynastic II, Uruk was ultimately annexed by the Akkadian Empire and went into decline. Later, in the Neo-Sumerian period, Uruk enjoyed revival as a major economic and cultural center under the sovereignty of Ur. The Eanna District was restored as part of an ambitious building program, which included a new temple for Inanna. This temple included a ziggurat, the 'House of the Universe' (Cuneiform: E₂.SAR.A) (𒂍𒊬𒀀) to the northeast of the Uruk period Eanna ruins.
Following the collapse of Ur (c. 2000 BC), Uruk went into a steep decline until about 850 BC when the Neo-Assyrian Empire annexed it as a provincial capital. Under the Neo-Assyrians and Neo-Babylonians, Uruk regained much of its former glory. By 250 BC, a new temple complex the 'Head Temple' (Akkadian: Bīt Reš) was added to northeast of the Uruk period Anu district. The Bīt Reš along with the Esagila was one of the two main centers of Neo-Babylonian astronomy. All of the temples and canals were restored again under Nabopolassar. During this era, Uruk was divided into five main districts: the Adad Temple, Royal Orchard, Ištar Gate, Lugalirra Temple, and Šamaš Gate districts.
Uruk, known as Orcha (Ὄρχα) to the Greeks, continued to thrive under the Seleucid Empire. During this period, Uruk was a city of 300 hectares and perhaps 40,000 inhabitants. In 200 BC, the 'Great Sanctuary' (Cuneiform: E₂.IRI₁₂.GAL, Sumerian: eš-gal) of Ishtar was added between the Anu and Eanna districts. The ziggurat of the temple of Anu, which was rebuilt in this period, was the largest ever built in Mesopotamia. When the Seleucids lost Mesopotamia to the Parthians in 141 BC, Uruk continued in use. The decline of Uruk after the Parthians may have been in part caused by a shift in the Euphrates River. By 300 AD, Uruk was mostly abandoned, but a group of Mandaeans settled there, based on some finds of Mandaic incantation bowls, and by c. 700 AD it was completely abandoned.

Political history
Uruk played a very important part in the political history of Sumer. Starting from the Early Uruk period, the city exercised hegemony over nearby settlements. At this time (c. 3800 BC), there were two centers of 20 ha (49 acres), Uruk in the south and Nippur in the north surrounded by much smaller 10 ha (25 acres) settlements. Later, in the Late Uruk period, its sphere of influence extended over all Sumer and beyond to external colonies in upper Mesopotamia and Syria.

In Uruk, in southern Mesopotamia, Sumerian civilization seems to have reached its creative peak. This is pointed out repeatedly in the references to this city in religious and, especially, in literary texts, including those of mythological content; the historical tradition as preserved in the Sumerian king-list confirms it. From Uruk the center of political gravity seems to have moved to Ur.

The recorded chronology of rulers over Uruk includes both mythological and historic figures in five dynasties. As in the rest of Sumer, power moved progressively from the temple to the palace. Rulers from the Early Dynastic period exercised control over Uruk and at times over all of Sumer. In myth, kingship was lowered from heaven to Eridu then passed successively through five cities until the deluge which ended the Uruk period. Afterwards, kingship passed to Kish at the beginning of the Early Dynastic period, which corresponds to the beginning of the Early Bronze Age in Sumer. In the Early Dynastic I period (2900–2800 BC), Uruk was in theory under the control of Kish. This period is sometimes called the Golden Age. During the Early Dynastic II period (2800–2600 BC), Uruk was again the dominant city exercising control of Sumer. This period is the time of the First Dynasty of Uruk sometimes called the Heroic Age. However, by the Early Dynastic IIIa period (2600–2500 BC) Uruk had lost sovereignty, this time to Ur. This period, corresponding to the Early Bronze Age III, is the end of the First Dynasty of Uruk. In the Early Dynastic IIIb period (2500–2334 BC), also called the Pre-Sargonic period (before the rise of the Akkadian Empire under Sargon of Akkad), Uruk continued to be ruled by Ur.

Architecture
Uruk has some of the first monumental constructions in architectural history, and certainly the largest of its era. Much of Near Eastern architecture can trace its roots to these prototypical buildings. The structures of Uruk are cited by two different naming conventions, one in German from the initial expedition, and the English translation of the same. The stratigraphy of the site is complex and as such much of the dating is disputed. In general, the structures follow the two main typologies of Sumerian architecture, Tripartite with 3 parallel halls and T-Shaped also with three halls, but the central one extends into two perpendicular bays at one end. The following table summarizes the significant architecture of the Eanna and Anu Districts. Temple N, Cone-Mosaic Courtyard, and Round Pillar Hall are often referred to as a single structure; the Cone-Mosaic Temple.

It is clear Eanna was dedicated to Inanna symbolized by Venus from the Uruk period. At that time, she was worshipped in four aspects as Inanna of the netherworld (Sumerian: ᵈinanna-kur), Inanna of the morning (Sumerian: ᵈinanna-hud₂), Inanna of the evening (Sumerian: ᵈinanna-sig), and Inanna (Sumerian: ᵈinanna-NUN). The names of four temples in Uruk at this time are known, but it is impossible to match them with either a specific structure and in some cases a deity.

sanctuary of Inanna (Sumerian: eš-ᵈinanna)
sanctuary of Inanna of the evening (Sumerian: eš-ᵈinanna-sig)
temple of heaven (Sumerian: e₂-an)
temple of heaven and netherworld (Sumerian: e₂-an-ki)

Archaeology
By the end of the Uruk period c. 3100 BC) Uruk had reached a size of 250 ha (620 acres). During the following Jemdet Nasr period it grew to a size of 600 ha (1,500 acres) by c. 2800 BC with the main temple area of Eanna being completely rebuilt after leveling the foundations of the Uruk period construction. A new city wall was constructed in this period.
The site, which lies about 50 miles (80 km) northwest of ancient Ur, is one of the largest in the region at around 5.5 km2 (2.1 sq mi) in area. The maximum extent is 3 km (1.9 miles) north/south, and 2.5 km (1.6 miles) east/west. There are three major tells within the site: The Eanna district, Bit Resh (Kullaba), and Irigal. Archaeologically, the site is divided into six parts

the É-Anna ziggurat ' Egipar-imin,
the É-Anna enclosure (Zingel),
the Anu-Antum temple complex, BitRes and Anu-ziggurat,
Irigal, the South Building,
Parthian structures including the Gareus-temple, and the Multiple Apse building,
the "Gilgameš" city-wall with associated Sinkâsid Palace and the Seleucid Bit Akîtu.

The location of Uruk was first noted by Fraser and Ross in 1835. William Loftus excavated there in 1850 and 1854 after a scouting mission in 1849. By Loftus' own account, he admits that the first excavations were superficial at best, as his financiers forced him to deliver large museum artifacts at a minimal cost. A large basalt stela found by Loftus was later lost. Warka was also scouted by archaeologist Walter Andrae in 1902. In 1905 Warka was visited by archaeologist Edgar James Banks.

From 1912 to 1913, Julius Jordan and his team from the German Oriental Society discovered the temple of Ishtar, one of four known temples located at the site. The temples at Uruk were quite remarkable as they were constructed with brick and adorned with colorful mosaics. Jordan also discovered part of the city wall. It was later discovered that this 40-to-50-foot (12 to 15 m) high brick wall, probably utilized as a defense mechanism, totally encompassed the city at a length of 9 km (5.6 mi). Utilizing sedimentary strata dating techniques, this wall is estimated to have been erected around 3000 BC. Jordan produced a contour map of the entire site.
The GOS returned to Uruk in 1928 and excavated until 1939, when World War II intervened. The team was led by Jordan until 1931 when Jordan became Director of Antiquities in Baghdad, then by A. Nöldeke, Ernst Heinrich, and H. J. Lenzen. Among the finds was the Stell of the Lion Hunt, excavated in a Jemdat Nadr layer but sylistically dated to Uruk IV.
The German excavations resumed after the war and were under the direction of Heinrich Lenzen from 1954 to 1967. He was followed in 1968 by J. Schmidt, and in 1978 by R.M. Boehmer. In total, the German archaeologists spent 39 seasons working at Uruk. The results are documented in two series of reports:

Ausgrabungen der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft in Uruk (ADFU), 17 volumes, 1912–2001
Ausgrabungen in Uruk-Warka, Endberichte (AUWE), 25 volumes, 1987–2007

Most recently, from 2001 to 2002, the German Archaeological Institute team led by Margarete van Ess, with Joerg Fassbinder and Helmut Becker, conducted a partial magnetometer survey in Uruk. In addition to the geophysical survey, core samples and aerial photographs were taken. This was followed up with high-resolution satellite imagery in 2005. Work resumed in 2016 and is currently concentrated on the city wall area and a survey of the surrounding landscape. Part of the work has been to create a digital twin of the Uruk archaeological area. The current effort also involves geophysical surveying. The soil characteristics of the site make ground penetrating radar unsuitable so caesium magnetometers, combined with resistivity probes, are being used.

Cuneiform tablets
A number of Proto-cuneiform clay tablets were found at Uruk. About 190 were Uruk V period (c. 3500 BC) "numerical tablets" or "impressed tablets", 1776 were from the Uruk IV period (c. 3300 BC), 3094 from the Uruk III period (c. 3200–2900 BC) which is also called the Jemdet Nasr period. Later cuneiform tablets were deciphered and include the famous SKL, a record of kings of the Sumerian civilization. There was an even larger cache of legal and scholarly tablets of the Neo-Babylonian, Late Babylonian, and Seleucid period, that have been published by Adam Falkenstein and other Assyriological members of the German Archaeological Institute in Baghdad as Jan J. A. Djik, Hermann Hunger, Antoine Cavigneaux, Egbert von Weiher, and Karlheinz Kessler, or others as Erlend Gehlken. Many of the cuneiform tablets form acquisitions by museums and collections as the British Museum, Yale Babylonian Collection, and the Louvre. The latter holds a unique cuneiform tablet in Aramaic known as the Aramaic Uruk incantation. The last dated cuneiform tablet from Uruk was W22340a, an astronomical almanac, which is dated to 79/80 AD.
The oldest known writing to feature a person's name was found in Uruk, in the form of several tablets that mention Kushim, who (assuming they are an individual person) served as an accountant recording transactions made in trading barley – 29,086 measures barley 37 months Kushim.

Beveled rim bowls were the most common type of container used during the Uruk period. They are believed to be vessels for serving rations of food or drink to dependent laborers. The introduction of the fast wheel for throwing pottery was developed during the later part of the Uruk period, and made the mass production of pottery simpler and more standardized.

Artifacts
The Mask of Warka, also known as the 'Lady of Uruk' and the 'Sumerian Mona Lisa', dating from 3100 BC, is one of the earliest representations of the human face. The carved marble female face is probably a depiction of Inanna. It is approximately 20 cm (7.9 in) tall, and may have been incorporated into a larger cult image. The mask was looted from the Iraq Museum during the invasion of Iraq in April 2003. It was recovered in September 2003 and returned to the museum.

Archaeological levels of Uruk
Archeologists have discovered multiple cities of Uruk built atop each other in chronological order.

Uruk XVIII Eridu period (c. 5000 BC): the founding of Uruk
Uruk XVIII–XVI Late Ubaid period (4800–4200 BC)
Uruk XVI–X Early Uruk period (4000–3800 BC)
Uruk IX–VI Middle Uruk period (3800–3400 BC)
Uruk V–IV Late Uruk period (3400–3100 BC): the earliest monumental temples of Eanna District are built
Uruk III Jemdet Nasr period (3100–2900 BC): the 9 km city wall is built
Uruk II
Uruk I

Anu District
The area traditionally called the Anu district consists of a single massive terrace, the Anu ziggurat, originally proposed to have been dedicated to the Sumerian sky god Anu.
The Stone Temple was built of limestone and bitumen on a podium of rammed earth and plastered with lime mortar. The podium itself was built over a woven reed mat called ĝipar, which was ritually used as a nuptial bed. The ĝipar was a source of generative power which then radiated upward into the structure. The structure of the Stone Temple further develops some mythological concepts from Enuma Elish, perhaps involving libation rites as indicated from the channels, tanks, and vessels found there. The structure was ritually destroyed, covered with alternating layers of clay and stone, then excavated and filled with mortar sometime later.

Eanna District
The Eanna district is historically significant as both writing and monumental public architecture emerged here during Uruk periods VI–IV. The combination of these two developments places Eanna as arguably the first true city and civilization in human history. Eanna during period IVa contains the earliest examples of writing.
The first building of Eanna, Stone-Cone Temple (Mosaic Temple), was built in period VI over a preexisting Ubaid temple and is enclosed by a limestone wall with an elaborate system of buttresses. The Stone-Cone Temple, named for the mosaic of colored stone cones driven into the adobe brick façade, may be the earliest water cult in Mesopotamia. It was "destroyed by force" in Uruk IVb period and its contents interred in the Riemchen Building.

In the following period, Uruk V, about 100 m east of the Stone-Cone Temple the Limestone Temple was built on a 2 m high rammed-earth podium over a pre-existing Ubaid temple, which like the Stone-Cone Temple represents a continuation of Ubaid culture. However, the Limestone Temple was unprecedented for its size and use of stone, a clear departure from traditional Ubaid architecture. The stone was quarried from an outcrop at Umayyad about 60 km east of Uruk. It is unclear if the entire temple or just the foundation was built of this limestone. The Limestone Temple is probably the first Inanna temple, but it is impossible to know with certainty. Like the Stone-Cone temple the Limestone temple was also covered in cone mosaics. Both of these temples were rectangles with their corners aligned to the cardinal directions, a central hall flanked along the long axis by two smaller halls, and buttressed façades; the prototype of all future Mesopotamian temple architectural typology.

Between these two monumental structures a complex of buildings (called A–C, E–K, Riemchen, Cone-Mosaic), courts, and walls was built during Eanna IVb. These buildings were built during a time of great expansion in Uruk as the city grew to 250 ha (620 acres) and established long-distance trade, and are a continuation of architecture from the previous period. The Riemchen Building, named for the 16 cm (6.3 in)×16 cm (6.3 in) brick shape called Riemchen by the Germans, is a memorial with a ritual fire kept burning in the center for the Stone-Cone Temple after it was destroyed. For this reason, Uruk IV period represents a reorientation of belief and culture. The facade of this memorial may have been covered in geometric and figural murals. The Riemchen bricks first used in this temple were used to construct all buildings of Uruk IV period Eanna. The use of colored cones as a façade treatment was greatly developed as well, perhaps used to greatest effect in the Cone-Mosaic Temple. Composed of three parts: Temple N, the Round Pillar Hall, and the Cone-Mosaic Courtyard, this temple was the most monumental structure of Eanna at the time. They were all ritually destroyed and the entire Eanna district was rebuilt in period IVa at an even grander scale.
During Eanna IVa, the Limestone Temple was demolished and the Red Temple built on its foundations. The accumulated debris of the Uruk IVb buildings were formed into a terrace, the L-Shaped Terrace, on which Buildings C, D, M, Great Hall, and Pillar Hall were built. Building E was initially thought to be a palace, but later proven to be a communal building. Also in period IV, the Great Court, a sunken courtyard surrounded by two tiers of benches covered in cone mosaic, was built. A small aqueduct drains into the Great Courtyard, which may have irrigated a garden at one time. The impressive buildings of this period were built as Uruk reached its zenith and expanded to 600 hectares. All the buildings of Eanna IVa were destroyed sometime in Uruk III, for unclear reasons.
The architecture of Eanna in period III was very different from what had preceded it. The complex of monumental temples was replaced with baths around the Great Courtyard and the labyrinthine Rammed-Earth Building. This period corresponds to Early Dynastic Sumer c. 2900 BC, a time of great social upheaval when the dominance of Uruk was eclipsed by competing city-states. The fortress-like architecture of this time is a reflection of that turmoil. The temple of Inanna continued functioning during this time in a new form and under a new name, 'The House of Inanna in Uruk' (Sumerian: e₂-ᵈinanna unuᵏⁱ-ga). The location of this structure is currently unknown.

List of rulers
The Sumerian King List (SKL) lists only 22 rulers among five dynasties of Uruk. The sixth dynasty was an Amorite dynasty not mentioned on the SKL. The following list should not be considered complete:

See also
References
Further reading
[2] R. McC. Adams and H. Nissen, "The Uruk Countryside: The Natural Setting of Urban Societies", Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972 ISBN 0-226-00500-3
[3] Banks, Edgar James, "A Vase Inscription from Warka", The American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literatures, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 62–63, 1904
[4] Brandes, Mark A., "Untersuchungen zur Komposition der Stiftmosaiken an der Pfeilerhalle der Schicht IVa in Uruk-Warka", Berlin : Gebr. Mann, 1968.
Green, MW (1984). "The Uruk Lament". Journal of the American Oriental Society. 104 (2): 253–279. doi:10.2307/602171. JSTOR 602171.
Liverani, Mario; Zainab Bahrani; Marc Van de Mieroop (2006). Uruk: The First City. London: Equinox Publishing. ISBN 1-84553-191-4.
[5] Seton Lloyd, "Foundations in the Dust", Oxford University Press, 1947
[6] Nies, James B., "A Pre-Sargonic Inscription on Limestone from Warka", Journal of the American Oriental Society 38, pp. 188–196, 1918
[7] Nissen, Hans J., "Uruk and I", Cuneiform Digital Library Journal 2024 (1), 2024
[8] Ann Louise Perkins, "The Comparative Archeology of Early Mesopotamia", Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 25, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1949
Postgate, J.N. (1994). Early Mesopotamia, Society and Economy at the Dawn of History. New York, New York: Routledge Publishing. p. 367. ISBN 0-415-00843-3.
Rositani, Annunziata, "The Status of War Prisoners at Uruk in the Old Babylonian Period", Journal of Ancient Near Eastern History, 2024
Rositani, Annunziata, "King Rīm-Anum of Uruk: A Reconstruction of an Old Babylonian Rebel Kingdom", DOCUMENTA ASIANA 14, pp. 109–123, 2024
Rothman, Mitchell S. (2001). Uruk, Mesopotamia & Its Neighbors. Santa Fe: School of American Research Press. p. 556. ISBN 1-930618-03-4.
Sandowicz, Małgorzata, Cornelia Wunsch, and Stefan Zawadzki, "On Shifting Social and Urban Landscapes in Uruk under Nabû-kudurrī-uṣur II: A View from One Neighborhood", Altorientalische Forschungen 50.2, pp. 206–236, 2023
Stevens, Kathryn, "Secrets in the Library: Protected Knowledge and Professional Identity in Late Babylonian Uruk", Iraq, vol. 75, pp. 211–53, 2013
Eva Strommenger, The Chronological Division of the Archaic Levels of Uruk-Eanna VI to III/II: Past and Present, American Journal of Archaeology, vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 479–487, Oct. 1980
Szarzyńska, Krystyna, "Offerings for the Goddess Inana in Archaic Uruk", Revue d'Assyriologie et d'archéologie Orientale, vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 7–28, 1993
Krystyna Szarzyńska, Observations on the Temple Precinct EŠ3 in Archaic Uruk, Journal of Cuneiform Sudies, vol. 63, pp. 1–4, 2011

External links

Archaeologists unearth ancient Sumerian riverboat in Iraq – Ars Technica – 4/8/2022
News from Old Uruk – Margarete van Ess 2021 Oriental Institute lecture on recent work
Earliest evidence for large scale organized warfare in the Mesopotamian world (Hamoukar vs. Uruk?)
Uruk at CDLI wiki
Lament for Unug (in Sumerian)
Archaeological Expedition Mapping Ancient City Of Uruk in 2002
Digital images of tablets from Uruk – CDLI


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 12,934
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uruk
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Uruk, ou Ourouk (prononcé : /uʁuk/) est une ville de l'ancienne Mésopotamie, dans le sud de l'Irak. Le site est aujourd'hui appelé Warka, terme dérivé de son nom antique Uruk, qui vient de l'akkadien, lui-même issu du nom sumérien ou pré-sumérien Unug, et qui a aussi donné l'hébreu Erekh dans la Bible. Le site d'Uruk fut occupé à partir de la période d'Obeïd (v. 5000 av. J.-C.), et ce jusqu'au IIIe siècle de notre ère. Cette ville joua un rôle très important sur les plans religieux et politique pendant quatre millénaires.
Uruk est l'une des agglomérations majeures de la civilisation mésopotamienne. Elle passe pour être la plus ancienne agglomération à avoir atteint le stade urbain dans la seconde moitié du IVe millénaire av. J.-C., pendant la période à laquelle elle a donné son nom (période d'Uruk), et c'est vraisemblablement là que l'écriture a été mise au point au même moment. Elle est ensuite un important centre politique et surtout religieux, grâce au rayonnement de ses deux divinités tutélaires, le dieu du Ciel, Anu, et surtout la déesse Inanna/Ishtar, dont le grand temple, l'Eanna, est le pôle majeur de la cité. Dans la tradition mésopotamienne, Uruk doit également une partie de son prestige aux rois semi-légendaires qui sont supposés y avoir régné, dont le plus connu est Gilgamesh. Sans jouer un rôle politique notable durant les deux derniers millénaires avant notre ère, Uruk resta un centre religieux et culturel majeur. Le regain d'activité que la ville connaît durant la seconde moitié du Ier millénaire av. J.-C., en particulier à l'époque hellénistique, en fait un des derniers lieux où se conserve l'antique tradition mésopotamienne, avec sa littérature et ses textes religieux et astronomiques, rédigés en écriture cunéiforme.
Uruk est donc un site capital pour la reconstruction de la longue histoire de la Mésopotamie. De nombreuses campagnes de fouilles y furent menées, dégageant notamment les diverses périodes du complexe monumental de l'Eanna et ses nombreux changements, et d'autres édifices de différentes périodes. Les milliers de tablettes inscrites exhumées sur ce site sont également d'une grande importance, attestant l'histoire économique, sociale, religieuse et intellectuelle du site sur plusieurs millénaires.

Fouilles
Le site d'Uruk a été localisé au milieu du XIXe siècle, grâce à ses ruines restées imposantes malgré le sable les recouvrant, par le géologue anglais William Kennett Loftus, qui entreprend les premières fouilles en 1849 et en 1853. Walter Andrae y effectue quelques prospections en 1902. À partir de 1912, les fouilles du site sont réalisées sous la responsabilité de la Deutsche Orient-Gesellschaft (DOG, « Société orientale allemande »), société scientifique allemande fondée en 1898 à Berlin, à la suite de l'intérêt manifesté à la fin du XIXe siècle pour les nouvelles découvertes concernant les « pays de la Bible ». La première campagne, jusqu'en 1913, dirigée par Julius Jordan et Conrad Preusser, se concentre surtout sur le secteur de l'Eanna, tout en explorant les restes des murailles qui ceignaient la cité.
Jordan revint à Warka en 1928, toujours pour le compte de la DOG, associée à la Notgemeinschaft der Deutschen Wissenschaft (NG, « Association d'urgence de la science allemande »). Il y reste une dizaine d'années, avant de laisser sa place à Arnold Nöldeke, puis Ernst Heinrich jusqu'en 1941. Les vestiges des époques récentes sont délaissés, pour explorer les niveaux anciens de l'Eanna. Les archéologues effectuent un sondage du sol en 1931, pour bien se rendre compte des différentes époques de la cité, et reconstituent le plan général de celle-ci. Ils dégagent les deux secteurs des temples principaux, l'Eanna et le Bīt Resh, et y trouvent de nombreuses tablettes d'argile datant de différentes époques depuis les débuts de l'écriture jusqu'à la fin de la civilisation mésopotamienne, les premières étant publiées par l'épigraphiste Adam Falkenstein. Interrompues en 1941, les fouilles d'Uruk sont poursuivies par différentes équipes sous l'égide de l'Institut allemand d'archéologie, dirigées successivement par Heinrich Jacob Lenzen, Jürgen Schmidt et depuis 1980 Rainer Michael Boehmer. De 1982 à 1984, un sondage est réalisé sur toute la surface du site. Les recherches sur place cessent en 1989 et reprirent épisodiquement jusqu'en 2001, quand M. van Ess prend la direction de l'équipe de fouilles. Quarante-et-une campagnes avaient alors été menées sur le site d'Uruk. Les fouilles ont repris en 2015, et sont notamment marquées par la découverte en 2022 d'un bateau daté d'environ 2000 av. J.-C., dans un état de conservation remarquable.
Les résultats des fouilles d'Uruk, dont les tablettes exhumées sur le site sont encore publiés dans deux séries successives :

Ausgrabungen der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft in Uruk (ADFU), 17 vol., 1912-1985 ;
Ausgrabungen in Uruk-Warka, Endberichte (AUWE), 24 vol., 1987- (série toujours en cours de publication).

La période d'Uruk : la « première ville » (v. 3600-3000/2900 av. J.-C.)
Le choix d'Uruk comme site éponyme de cette période est peu contestable comparé à d'autres périodes, du fait de l'importance que la cité a manifestement à cette période, et surtout pour l'historiographie de celle-ci, en raison de l'importance des découvertes architecturales et épigraphiques qui ont révélé son caractère « révolutionnaire ». La ville couvrait dans les 70 hectares au début du IVe millénaire, elle atteint les 100 hectares au début de l'Uruk final, puis 230 hectares à l'extrême fin de la période vers 3000. C'est pour cette période, et de loin, la plus grande agglomération connue de Basse Mésopotamie, et il n'y a aucun site de taille notable dans ses environs, révélant un cas de « macrocéphalie urbaine ». On a identifié sur ce site les caractéristiques majeures de la période d'Uruk. D'abord le début de l'urbanisation, qui se marque par la taille croissante de l'agglomération, les traits d'une société de plus en plus hiérarchisée, la présence d'une architecture monumentale montrant l'existence d'un pouvoir fort, qui atteint le stade de l'État. Cependant aucun quartier d'habitation n'a été mis au jour : on ne sait rien du cadre quotidien des habitants de celle qui passe parfois pour être la « première ville ». L'art de cette période apparaît dans les objets exhumés à Uruk, notamment les sceaux-cylindres, qui sont une innovation de cette période, et représentent alors beaucoup de thèmes religieux, ainsi que la vie quotidienne. C'est enfin sur ce site (avec celui de Suse) que sont représentés le plus clairement les progrès dans la comptabilité accomplis à cette période, et surtout les débuts de l'écriture, une autre des inventions majeures de la période d'Uruk. Le rayonnement de la cité au-delà des limites de la Basse Mésopotamie indique que la culture « urukéenne » exerce un rayonnement fort dans plusieurs régions du Moyen-Orient dans les derniers siècles du IVe millénaire, mais il est impossible de le faire correspondre à un éventuel « proto-empire » centré sur cette ville.

Chronologie
Les divers sondages effectués à Warka et l'analyse des céramiques qui en ont été extraites révèlent que le site est occupé à partir de la fin de la période d'Obeïd, vers la fin du Ve millénaire, qui correspond aux niveaux archéologiques d'Uruk XVIII à XIII (de 4200 à 3900 approximativement). Deux édifices (des temples ?) de cette époque ont été repérés dans le secteur d'Anu, recouverts par la suite par le Steingebaüde (bâtiment de pierre). La période suivante, à laquelle la ville a donné son nom, la Période d'Uruk, couvre les niveaux XII à IV, plus le III pour la période dite de Djemdet Nasr qui est proche de celle d'Uruk. La chronologie de ces niveaux, qui couvrent en gros le IVe millénaire, est très approximative et débattue. Il est très complexe de dater les niveaux archéologiques (chronologie absolue), et de les faire correspondre à ceux des autres sites de la Mésopotamie et des régions voisines (chronologie relative). D. Surenhagen a distingué plusieurs phases. Ainsi se dégageraient plusieurs périodes marquées par des changements, dont l'interprétation sociale, politique et encore plus ethnique est très complexe si ce n'est impossible à faire en l'état actuel de la documentation. Ce sont les traces architecturales qui permettent finalement de mieux connaître Uruk durant la période à laquelle elle a donné son nom :

les premières périodes, celles de l'Obeid final, correspondant à une phase formatrice de la période d'Uruk, voient l'introduction de nouveaux types de céramiques (grise et rouge), ce qui reflète peut-être l'arrivée de nouvelles populations, mais d'autres explications sont possibles ;
la phase suivante, l'Uruk ancien (niveaux XII à IX, à situer dans la première moitié du IVe millénaire) est celle durant laquelle se constituent les types de céramiques caractéristiques de la période d'Uruk : d'abord les premières poteries réalisées au tour, non peintes, de couleur grise ou à engobe rouge, puis les écuelles à bords biseautés (beveled-rim bowls) réalisées en série à la main ;
le début de la phase d'Uruk moyen (niveaux VIII à VI) est marqué par une multiplication des formes de céramiques, des décors, qui traduisent manifestement de nouvelles mutations ;
le matériel céramique connaît à nouveau une série de changements au début de la période d'Uruk récent (niveaux V à IV, v. 3500/3400-3200/3100), marquée par l'érection des bâtiments les plus monumentaux qui refléteraient l'apogée de la richesse de la cité au IVe millénaire ;
le dernier niveau correspond à la période de Djemdet Nasr (niveau III, v. 3200/3100-3000/2900), une dernière phase de changements monumentaux tout aussi complexes à interpréter que les précédents ; en Mésopotamie, cette époque correspond à un retrait de l'influence de la civilisation d'Uruk et à l'émergence de cultures régionales.

Les monuments de la période d'Uruk final
Dès le niveau V (3500 av. J.-C.) et certainement bien avant, l'agglomération d'Uruk n'est plus un village mais est devenue une ville. Il est impossible de décrire l'organisation de la ville dans son ensemble car les fouilles pratiquées dans le secteur de l'« Eanna » (d'après le nom du temple d'Inanna/Ishtar qui s'y trouve aux périodes postérieures) et dans celui du « Temple Blanc » ne donnent aucune indication sur la structure, ni sur les composantes de l'agglomération. L'interprétation des bâtiments mis au jour est débattue, même s'il est manifeste qu'ils reflètent la présence d'un pouvoir de plus en plus fort qui souhaite y imprimer la marque de sa puissance. Il est capable de mobiliser bien plus de travailleurs que ceux mobilisés pour les constructions des périodes précédentes, ce qui illustre le niveau de richesse qu'il a atteint. Ces constructions sont également l'occasion de diverses innovations architecturales et artistiques, les différents chantiers d'Uruk ayant été une opportunité pour les artistes de l'époque de mettre en œuvre leur imagination créatrice.

Le plus important groupe de constructions est celui de l'Eanna. Les restes d'au moins sept « temples » superposés ou juxtaposés, datant de la deuxième moitié de la période, ont été retrouvés au pied de la ziggurat bâtie à la fin du IIe millénaire. Ils sont remarquables par leur taille. L'un des plus anciens édifices monumentaux est le « Temple calcaire » (Kalksteintempel), daté du niveau V, qui doit son nom au fait qu'il est construit sur un soubassement en blocs de calcaire extraits dans des carrières voisines d'Uruk. Son plan suit la forme tripartite développée à la période d'Obeïd, mais dans des proportions plus grandioses : 30 m sur plus de 80 m, avec une salle centrale large de 12 m. Une nouvelle étape a été franchie dans la monumentalité. Daté en gros de la même période (peut-être plus ancien) et situé plus à l'ouest, le « Temple aux mosaïques » (Steinstifttempel, « Temple aux cônes de pierre ») est un édifice de plan tripartite protégé par une petite enceinte intérieure qui tire son nom de sa décoration en cônes de pierre de couleurs blanche, grisâtre ou rouge, formant une mosaïque.
La phase suivante, le niveau IV, voit la construction de plusieurs édifices monumentaux témoignant des capacités croissantes des institutions urukéennes. La chronologie de ces constructions reste encore émaillée d'incertitudes. On distingue couramment deux phases (B puis A), ou trois (C, B et A). Parmi les constructions qui semblent les plus anciennes (niveaux IV C et B) se trouvent plusieurs bâtiments rectangulaires (bâtiments F, G, H, K et B) à salle centrale (Mittelsaal selon la terminologie des fouilleurs allemands), le vaste « Bâtiment E » ou « Bâtiment carré », centré sur une grande cour carrée bordée sur chacun de ses côtés par quatre unités organisées autour d'une grande pièce rectangulaire à deux piliers ; ce dernier édifice et certains autres pourraient en fait remonter au niveau V, suivant des estimations récentes. Plus à l'ouest, à l'ancien emplacement du Temple aux mosaïques, est édifié vers cette période (si ce n'est à la suivante) le petit « Bâtiment en briquettes » (Riemchengebäude). Une autre construction située à l'est à l'emplacement de l'ancien Temple calcaire doit son nom de « Temple rouge » au badigeon qui recouvrait ses murs ; elle date de cette période ou du début de la suivante. Le « niveau IVA » voit la construction d'autres grands bâtiments, alors que d'autres de la période précédente continuent à être en service. Le « Temple C » et le « Temple D » présentent un plan tripartite. Le second est le plus vaste bâtiment de l'Eanna, avec des dimensions de 80 mètres sur 50. Le premier est plus petit (54 × 22 m). D'autres édifices, qualifiés de « halls », dateraient de la même période : le « Grand hall » (Hallenbau) et son voisin le « Hall aux piliers » (Pfeilerhalle, qui est bordé par des piliers) au nord-ouest, et le « Hall aux piliers ronds » (Rundpfeilerhalle) dans la partie est. Un dernier édifice important existant à cette époque et peut-être construit à la précédente est la « Grande Cour » (Grosser Hof) située à l'ouest, qui pourrait avoir été un jardin.
Au niveau III, correspondant à la période de Djemdet-Nasr datée des derniers siècles du IVe millénaire et qui marque la transition entre la Période d'Uruk et celle des Dynasties archaïques, une grande rupture architecturale se produit. Les constructions sont arasées, et on y édifie une vaste terrasse de 2 mètres de hauteur, sur laquelle devait se trouver un édifice dont il ne reste plus rien, peut-être l'ancêtre de la ziggurat d'Inanna qui occupe cet emplacement un millénaire plus tard. Ce niveau archéologique a également livré des œuvres d'art remarquables, dont certaines dans un dépôt qui avait probablement une fonction cultuelle, nommé Sammelfund par les fouilleurs du site.
Les bâtiments des niveaux VI-IV de l'Eanna auraient été des temples selon les archéologues allemands qui les ont mis au jour. Cette identification a été mise en cause, car on ne sait rien de la nature exacte du pouvoir qui dominait Uruk à cette époque. Aucun des édifices dégagés dans l'Eanna ne présente la moindre installation cultuelle, et ils ont surtout été identifiés comme temples parce que les théories dominantes à l'époque de leur découverte voulaient que le pouvoir ait été exercé par une sorte de pouvoir théocratique (la « cité-temple » d'Anton Deimel). L'Eanna peut tout aussi bien être considéré comme le centre du pouvoir politique. L'étude architecturale des édifices ne permet pas de mettre en évidence des édifices ayant les traits caractéristiques des temples des périodes postérieures, même si la présence de dépôts votifs semble pouvoir indiquer la présence d'espaces cultuels. Il est probable que toutes les constructions n'aient pas une même fonction, et qu'on puisse y identifier autant des palais et des bâtiments administratifs que des temples. Quoi qu'il en soit, il est incontestable que le pouvoir qui dirige Uruk durant les derniers siècles du IVe millénaire est d'une importance bien supérieure à celui qui existait dans les périodes précédentes. Il a les moyens de mobiliser des ressources variées pour créer un vaste complexe monumental planifié, en stimulant le savoir-faire et la capacité d'innovation des artisans, qui peuvent y faire preuve de grande créativité dans le plan des édifices ou dans les techniques employées. Cet aménagement est sans précédent connu en Mésopotamie, et témoigne bien de la puissance d'Uruk à cette période. Les tablettes de la période indiquent que l'économie et la société sont déjà dirigées par des institutions disposant d'une administration complexe.

À 500 mètres à l'ouest de l'Eanna se dressait le deuxième groupe monumental de la période d'Uruk, dans le futur secteur du Bit Resh, le temple du dieu Anu à l'époque hellénistique, ce qui fait que ce complexe a pu être interprété comme un sanctuaire de cette divinité (ses découvreurs l'ont qualifié de « Ziggurat d'Anu »), sans autre indice. Sur une plate-forme de 13 mètres de hauteur et d'une quarantaine de mètres de côté avait été bâti un temple de 22,30 × 17,50 m surélevé par un socle de 30 à 40 cm, le « Temple blanc ». Il doit son nom au plâtre qui recouvre ses murs encore conservés sur trois mètres de hauteur. Organisé autour d'une salle centrale rectangulaire ouvrant sur plusieurs pièces situées sur ses deux côtés les plus longs, il comprend toujours un autel, ce qui est exceptionnel. Ces caractéristiques font que cet édifice peut probablement être considéré comme un temple. Les fouilles ont révélé que cet édifice recouvre toute une série d'édifices antérieurs, avec en dessous, une autre terrasse et deux très grands sanctuaires de la période d'Obeïd. Le « Bâtiment de pierre » (Steingebäude), datant apparemment du début de la période d'Uruk, situé au sud-ouest de la ziggurat, est celui dont les ruines sont encore les plus apparentes ; ses fouilleurs voulaient y voir un cénotaphe, mais sa fonction reste énigmatique (un temple ?).

Un art novateur, reflet des évolutions socio-politiques
Les changements politiques et sociaux de la période d'Uruk récent ont été accompagnés par des changements dans les arts visuels, reflétant des évolutions de l'idéologie, notamment dans les domaines politique et religieux. La construction de plusieurs bâtiments de l'Eanna est l'occasion de la mise au point de décors de mosaïques réalisés avec des cônes d'argile peints. La glyptique connaît un fort développement, avec la mise au point des sceaux-cylindres, permettant de dérouler des images plus complexes que les sceaux-cachets des périodes précédentes, notamment des frises se déroulant sans fin. L'art prend une tournure réaliste, avec la représentation des humains dans leurs activités quotidiennes, ou de rondes d'animaux. Les animaux sont également représentés par plusieurs statuettes. Les figures dominantes des différentes formes de gravure et de sculpture provenant d'Uruk sont de forme humaine. La période d'Uruk porterait les premières traces d'un anthropomorphisme des divinités mésopotamiennes. Le personnage majeur de l'art de cette époque est cependant le « roi-prêtre », un personnage barbu portant un bandeau, manifestement une figure royale, s'illustrant dans des scènes de combat ou de dévotion à la grande déesse. Des œuvres majeures montrant ces personnages ont été mises au jour dans le Sammelfund (dépôt) du niveau III, comme le grand vase en albâtre mesurant 1,20 mètre de hauteur, sculpté sur trois registres, représentant notamment une scène d'offrande dirigée par le roi-prêtre faisant face à la grande déesse Inanna, représentée sous forme humaine et associée à son symbole, un double mât à l'extrémité recourbée. Une autre découverte de ce niveau, la tête de la « Dame de Warka », une sculpture grandeur nature d'un visage féminin très mutilé dont il ne reste que le masque de marbre, pourrait représenter cette déesse. Le « roi-prêtre » est quant à lui le personnage principal de la stèle de la chasse, qui le montre en train de chasser des lions, attitude caractéristique des rois mésopotamiens qu'on retrouvera chez les Assyriens plus de deux mille ans plus tard. Plusieurs statues en ronde-bosse représentent également cette scène.

Les débuts de l'écriture
C'est à Uruk qu'apparaissent les plus anciennes tablettes écrites en Mésopotamie. Cela concorde bien avec certains récits légendaires sumériens qui font de cette ville le lieu d'invention de l'écriture. C'est au niveau IV (période d'Uruk final, v. 3350-3200) qu'ont été exhumées les plus anciennes tablettes, avant tout dans le secteur de l'Eanna, confirmant la vocation de celui-ci comme centre du pouvoir et de l'administration dans la ville. Près de 2 000 tablettes remontent à cette période. Elles avaient été réutilisées dans des constructions peu de temps après leur réalisation, ce qui fait qu'elles ont été retrouvées hors de leur contexte de rédaction. Il s'agit de textes de comptabilité avant tout, servant à l'administration d'une institution dont la nature exacte reste inconnue. Le niveau III (v. 3200-3000, correspondant à la période de Djemdet Nasr) a lui livré plus de 3 000 tablettes, elles aussi avant tout comptables. Mais on trouve dès les premiers temps de l'écriture des listes lexicales à vocation plus intellectuelle. Le corpus de textes mis au jour dans les niveaux IV et III s'élève ainsi à plus de 5 000 tablettes, ce qui constitue de loin le plus important lot de la période des débuts de l'écriture.
Les tablettes se complexifient entre les périodes IV et III : elles sont plus grandes et comprennent plus de signes plus on avance dans le temps, les dessins se simplifient, et elles sont plus précises, contiennent plus d'informations. C'est également à la période de Djemdet Nasr que l'on commence à utiliser des calames à l'extrémité taillée en triangle pour inciser les tablettes, ce qui aboutit finalement à la graphie cunéiforme. R. K. Englund distingue trois types de tablettes pour le niveau IV : des étiquettes d'argile indiquant sans doute la personne recevant ou donnant un produit ; des petites tablettes avec des nombres associés à des pictogrammes représentant des objets ou personnes ; de plus grandes tablettes, divisées en plusieurs sections, comportant les deux mêmes éléments que le type précédent, mais plus nombreux, constituant sans doute des récapitulatifs (parfois le total numérique des objets est noté au revers de la tablette). Ce dernier type est celui qui est le plus courant au niveau III.
Les causes du début de l'écriture sont sujettes à de nombreux débats. L'écriture est précédée par l'apparition aux périodes antérieures de procédés que l'on identifie parfois comme de la « pré-écriture » : des sceaux servant à contrôler des biens entreposés ou transitant entre plusieurs endroits, dont les sceaux-cylindres qui apparaissent à la période d'Uruk ; des jetons (calculi) servant sans doute à indiquer quels étaient les produits contrôlés ; et des bulles d'argile contenant ces mêmes jetons. Plus tard, à la période précédant directement l'invention de l'écriture (Uruk V), la bulle est aplatie, et devient une tablette, comportant des signes rudimentaires (des chiffres) et/ou des empreintes de sceaux. Mais les liens entre les jetons et les signes qu'ils comportent, et les premiers signes écrits sont loin d'être probants, et faire du second le dérivé des premiers est sans doute trop hâtif. Il est en tout cas évident que l'écriture participe des innovations qui accompagnent à la période d'Uruk la constitution de plus grandes entités politiques, qui deviennent de véritables États. Les tablettes retrouvées sont probablement issues des archives d'une grande institution (temple ou palais) qui dispose d'un grand poids dans l'économie et la société d'Uruk au cours des derniers siècles du IVe millénaire. Les périodes suivantes voient le développement de l'écriture se poursuivre, mais le site d'Uruk n'a offert aucun témoignage de cela.

Le sanctuaire d'Inanna
Même s'il est difficile de retrouver des édifices assurément religieux parmi ceux fouillés pour les niveaux IV et III, il est évident dans les tablettes de ces périodes qu'Inanna, déesse sumérienne liée à l'amour et identifiée comme la planète Vénus, est déjà la divinité tutélaire du secteur de l'Eanna ; son temple se trouve donc probablement parmi le groupe monumental de ce secteur. Elle est désignée dans les textes par le signe mùš. Elle apparaît sous plusieurs formes : Inanna du matin (húd), Inanna du soir (sig), Inanna des Enfers (kur), et Inanna-NUN (sens indéterminé, peut-être « princière ») ; les deux premiers sens semblent faire référence à son caractère astral (Vénus étant l'étoile du matin et du soir). Comme cela a été évoqué plus haut, cette déesse apparaît vraisemblablement sous une forme anthropomorphe sur les bas-reliefs du « grand vase d'Uruk », et peut-être dans d'autres représentations de la période. Plusieurs de ces temples semblent mentionnés dans les tablettes administratives, notamment le « temple d'Inanna » (é-dInanna) mais aussi un « temple du Ciel » (é-an) qui pourrait être la plus ancienne attestation du terme Eanna. Mais la lecture du signe AN, désignant le Ciel, pose problème à cette période car le Ciel est également la divinité sumérienne An, autre grand dieu tutélaire d'Uruk aux périodes postérieures ; ce même signe pouvant aussi désigner la « divinité » (dingir) en général, il est impossible de déterminer son sens précis dans les textes archaïques. On ne sait donc pas si An est déjà évoqué dans les textes archaïques. Quoi qu'il en soit, il apparaît dans la documentation administrative que les sanctuaires d'Inanna reçoivent régulièrement des offrandes, notamment lors de festivités. Cette déesse a déjà un rayonnement qui dépasse Uruk, puisqu'elle se retrouve dans des tablettes de sites contemporains d'Uruk III, à Djemdet-Nasr et Tell Uqair qui mentionneraient des offrandes depuis ces villes vers son sanctuaire d'Uruk. Cela pourrait refléter selon P. Steinkeller l'existence d'une « amphictyonie » impliquant plusieurs grandes cités du Sud mésopotamien qui assureraient conjointement le culte d'Inanna, qui serait alors une divinité majeure du pays sumérien.

Période des dynasties archaïques (v. 2900-2340 av. J.-C.)
Les rois légendaires
La Liste royale sumérienne, montrant les souverains archaïques rapportés par la tradition mésopotamienne, attribue à Uruk une « première dynastie » qui aurait exercé la domination sur les royaumes voisins, vers une période que les historiens contemporains situent au Dynastique archaïque II (DA II, v. 2800-2600). Elle aurait enlevé la suprématie au royaume de Kish sous les rois Dumuzi le pêcheur (différent de Dumuzi le berger, dieu sumérien époux d'Inanna), qui aurait capturé le roi Enmebaragesi de Kish, et sous son successeur Gilgamesh. Ces deux souverains seraient en fait précédés par trois autres : le premier, Meskiangasher, est présenté comme étant le fils du dieu-soleil Utu, et ayant régné à Eanna ; son successeur Enmerkar est quant à lui présenté comme roi d'Uruk, qu'il aurait construite ; son fils Lugalbanda règne ensuite. Ce même texte fait de Gilgamesh le roi de Kullab, et non d'Uruk.
Trois de ces souverains sont connus par des cycles de récits épiques qui les mettent en scène. Enmerkar et Lugalbanda sont souvent présentés comme luttant contre la cité d'Aratta, un royaume situé vers l'Iran actuel, auquel ils disputent les faveurs d'Inanna, qui finit par devenir la déesse d'Uruk. C'est au cours d'un de ces conflits que le premier aurait inventé l'écriture. Gilgamesh est quant à lui le héros de plusieurs récits sumériens, avant la rédaction de sa fameuse épopée au début du IIe millénaire. Certains racontent sa lutte contre le roi Agga de Kish, qui est d'après la Liste royale le dernier souverain de la dynastie de Kish vaincue par Uruk : le passage de témoin entre les deux hégémonies se ferait donc sous ces deux rois.
Mais la tradition sumérienne sur ces rois d'Uruk connue par d'autres textes est parfois contradictoire, et on ne peut en tirer de certitude quant à la réalité historique des faits qu'elle rapporte, d'autant plus que les récits mis par écrit ont souvent une visée politique (le cycle de Gilgamesh étant ainsi promu par les rois d'Ur III). On peut au mieux en tirer quelques traits généraux : l'importance du royaume d'Uruk durant les premiers siècles des Dynasties archaïques, avec apparemment des rois qui ont marqué l'histoire du pays de Sumer ; l'importance de la déesse Inanna dans la cité et dans son rayonnement ; divers conflits qui ont marqué l'histoire de la ville.

Les premiers rois « historiques » d'Uruk
C'est à partir du DA III (2600-2340) que l'on dispose de sources plus fiables sur l'histoire du pays de Sumer, provenant avant tout de Girsu (Tello), dans le royaume de Lagash, et secondairement de Nippur. Quelques documents font allusion à des souverains d'Uruk ; en dépit de leur faible nombre, ils permettent de déceler la puissance de certains d'entre eux. Si l'on se réfère à la Liste royale sumérienne, une nouvelle dynastie d'Uruk exerce la domination à Sumer, quand son roi Enshakushana bat Hadanish de Hamazi (un royaume situé dans le Zagros). Ce roi est connu par des inscriptions de la période, dont une qui le présente dans une inscription comme le fils d'un roi d'Ur, Elili : les liens entre Uruk et la cité voisine semblent forts à cette période. D'autres documents indiquent qu'Enshakushana a réussi à atteindre à un moment de son règne une grande puissance, puisqu'il est le premier souverain connu à se proclamer « en (titre souverain) de Sumer (ki-en-gi) », et « roi du pays » (lugal kalam-ma). Il prétend avoir vaincu Enbi-Ishtar de Kish, non présent dans la Liste royale. Lugal-kinishe-dudu, qui est sans doute son successeur, est connu par un clou d'argile commémorant un traité de paix qu'il conclut avec son homologue Enmetena de Lagash. Son fils Lugal-kisalsi monte ensuite sur le trône d'Uruk. Les inscriptions de ces deux rois indiquent qu'ils domineraient plusieurs grandes villes importantes de Sumer. Finalement, leur État tombe sous la coupe de Lugal-zagesi, originaire d'Umma vers 2350. Ce dernier se constitue un royaume dominant toute la Basse Mésopotamie, dont il établit la capitale à Uruk : la Liste royale comme plusieurs de ses inscriptions le présentent comme un roi d'Uruk. Cela montre l'importance de cette ville en tant que capitale politique dans le sud de Sumer. Mais cette période est éphémère, puisque Lugal-zagesi est battu par Sargon d'Akkad, qui s'empare de ses possessions.

La cité au Dynastique archaïque
La ville d'Uruk atteint sa taille maximale au Dynastique archaïque, quand elle recouvre une surface de 400 hectares environ, la population de la région semblant se concentrer encore plus dans la ville-centre, si on en juge par la disparition de nombreux villages et hameaux. C'est de cette période que daterait la construction de sa vaste muraille de plus de 9 kilomètres de long, que la tradition attribue à Gilgamesh. Les sondages réalisés dans la surface enceinte indiquent que c'est à cette période que l'occupation du site est la plus dense, même si toute la surface n'est pas bâtie ; le Dynastique archaïque I (c. 2900-2750) représente en particulier la période de la plus intense occupation.
Les textes de la période sont les premiers à fournir quelques indications sur sa topographie. Ils distinguent Uruk (Unug) et Kullab (ou Kulaba), entre lesquels la distinction n'est pas claire. La tradition postérieure (notamment la Liste royale sumérienne et les cycles des rois archaïques d'Uruk) a incité certains chercheurs à y voir deux villages qui auraient fusionné (Uruk situé dans le secteur de l'Eanna et Kullab à l'emplacement futur du Bit Resh), mais les textes n'indiquent jamais explicitement cela. Il semblerait plutôt que Kullab soit un quartier d'Uruk dont le nom serve parfois à désigner la ville entière. Le sanctuaire d'Uruk est célébré dans des hymnes aux temples exhumés à Abu Salabikh (v. XXVIe siècle), évoquant ses deux divinités tutélaires Inanna et Anu, et les sanctuaires d'Uruk et Kullab. Inanna est d'ailleurs présentée comme la déesse tutélaire de la ville par les textes de cette période, et les souverains prennent un soin particulier de son culte ; Anu semble avoir un rôle plus effacé bien que son culte bénéficie également de patronages royaux. Mais les monuments de la période dans le secteur de l'Eanna, qui reste central, sont recouverts par les constructions postérieures et n'ont donc pu être approchés qu'approximativement. Un temple sur terrasse précédait peut-être la ziggurat d'Ur III, pouvant remonter à la période de Djemdet-Nasr avant un développement durant le Dynastique archaïque. Dans le même secteur ont été repérées les fondations d'un énorme édifice d'environ 10 000 m2, le « Bâtiment en pisé » (Stampflehmgebaüde), auquel on attribue généralement une fonction palatiale. Il pourrait avoir été planifié par Lugal-zagesi, puis mis en chantier sans jamais être achevé en raison de la défaite de celui-ci face à Sargon d'Akkad.

Premiers empires et derniers rois d'Uruk
Uruk sous les empires d'Akkad et d'Ur (v. 2340-2000 av. J.-C.)
Sous l'empire d'Akkad (2340-2154), Uruk reste l'une des principales cités du pays de Sumer, d'autant plus que sa déesse tutélaire Inanna/Ishtar est la patronne de la dynastie régnante (même si les souverains semblent plutôt privilégier Ishtar d'Akkad). Mais la cité reste insoumise, et participe aux côtés de ses voisines aux grandes révoltes qui secouent les règnes de Sargon et surtout Naram-Sîn. C'est un certain Amar-girid, proclamé roi d'Uruk, qui dirige la révolte des villes sumériennes contre ce dernier, qui est difficilement réprimée. La domination akkadienne s'achève quelques années après, notamment en raison des attaques des Gutis. Une nouvelle dynastie indépendante règne alors à Uruk. C'est un roi de cette cité, Utu-hegal, qui aurait débarrassé vers la fin du XXIIe siècle la Basse Mésopotamie de ces mêmes Gutis en défaisant leur roi Tirigan. Ce succès qui a été commémoré dans un texte littéraire sumérien lui a valu de voir son souvenir préservé par la tradition mésopotamienne postérieure.
Le règne d'Utu-hegal s'achève peu après, quand il est vaincu par Ur-Namma, qui est sans doute son propre frère. Celui-ci choisit de régner depuis Ur, dont il fonde la troisième dynastie (Ur III). Son successeur Shulgi fait de cet État un véritable empire. C'est à ces deux rois que l'on doit des restaurations effectuées à Uruk, ainsi que la construction de la ziggurat de l'Eanna (nom cérémoniel é-gi6-pàr-imin, « Maison des sept Giparu »). Elle a une base presque carrée de 55 × 51,50 mètres de côté, et ses ruines s'élèvent encore sur 14 mètres, l'ensemble devait culminer à environ 30 mètres à l'origine. Son premier étage s'élevait à 11,20 mètres et présentait un décor extérieur de pilastres et de redans. Ses murs avaient apparemment été recouverts d'un plâtre de couleur claire. Comme les autres ziggurats de cette période, on parvenait à son sommet par un triple escalier (deux escaliers accolés à la façade et un escalier perpendiculaire rejoignant le centre de l'édifice) ; elle disposait de deux ou trois étages, le dernier étant probablement surmonté par un temple. La ziggurat est située dans une enceinte disposant de pièces allongées servant sans doute aux besoins du culte ; plus loin se trouvent au moins deux cours disposant de leur propre enceinte. Des parties de colliers en agate inscrits aux noms de l'épouse du roi Shu-Sîn, Kubatum, et de sa concubine Tiamat-Bashti ont été exhumés. On sait par des textes de la période que le Grand prêtre (en/enu) d'Inanna vit dans un édifice (appelé é-gi6-pàr/Giparum) qui n'a pas été mis au jour. Le complexe sacré est complété par un temple dédié au dieu Ningishzida. Shu-Sîn semble s'être fait enterrer dans un mausolée situé dans les alentours d'Uruk, qui sert également à son culte funéraire. Cela indique que les rois d'Ur III ont peut-être continué à se faire ensevelir près de la cité dont leur dynastie est probablement originaire. La mise en valeur à cette période du cycle épique des rois archaïques d'Uruk (Enmerkar, Lugalbanda et Gilgamesh) semble lié à cela, les rois d'Ur III se présentant comme les descendants de ces illustres souverains.
Plusieurs textes de cette période font référence à un rituel important qui semble originaire d'Uruk, le « mariage sacré » (ou hiérogamie), qui a pour origine les récits sur les amours de la déesse Inanna avec le dieu Dumuzi, présents dans plusieurs textes qui ont peut-être été rédigés par le clergé de l'Eanna. Mais à la période d'Ur III le roi prend la place symbolique du dieu et devient ainsi l'époux de la déesse. Un hymne présente le rituel avec le roi Shulgi comme acteur principal : il se rend à Uruk en bateau, avant de se rendre dans l'Eanna où a lieu le rituel, vêtu d'habits d'apparat. Le déroulement exact du rituel d'union nous échappe. Des hymnes d'amours dans lesquels Inanna célèbre Shulgi et son deuxième successeur Shu-Sîn sont également issus de cette tradition, qui se diffuse dans d'autres villes mésopotamiennes durant les siècles suivants. Une autre grande fête religieuse d'Uruk bien attestée pour cette période est la fête du bateau du Ciel (ezem-má-an-na), en référence à une embarcation utilisée par Inanna pour se rendre à Eridu dans le mythe Inanna et Enki ; il a lieu au cours du dixième mois du calendrier local, au moins durant cinq jours pendant lesquels la déesse reçoit de nombreuses offrandes.

Les derniers rois d'Uruk durant la période amorrite (v. 2000-1700 av. J.-C.)
La dynastie d'Ur III s'effondre vers 2004 sous les coups des Élamites. Uruk subit peut-être des destructions à ce moment-là. Un texte appartenant à la série des « Lamentations » sur les malheurs des villes de Sumer, rédigé quelques décennies après les faits, lui est en tout cas dédié (Lamentation sur la destruction d'Uruk). Mais il n'est pas sûr que cela reflète des événements qui se soient effectivement produits, étant donné que ce type de textes répond plus à un topos littéraire qu'à une volonté de rapporter un événement réel. Quoi qu'il en soit, ce sont les Amorrites qui tirent parti de la situation suivant la chute d'Ur, puisque plusieurs dynasties issues de cette ethnie s'installent à la tête de royaumes en Basse Mésopotamie. Le premier royaume à dominer la région est celui d'Isin, dans lequel Uruk est inclus, avant de passer sous la coupe de Larsa après les victoires de son roi Gungunnum (1932-1906). Uruk connaît une brève période d'indépendance autour de 1900, avec les rois Alila-hadûm et Sumu-El, avant de repasser sous la coupe de Larsa vers 1891.
Vers 1860, la cité redevient indépendante grâce à Sîn-kashid, qui fonde une nouvelle dynastie, plus durable. Mal documentée depuis Uruk, cette période reste surtout connue par les sources extérieures à la cité. Le monument majeur érigé à cette période est le grand palais royal de Sîn-kashid (environ 100 × 145 mètres), situé à l'ouest du quartier de Kullab, donc en périphérie de la ville ce qui est inhabituel pour un tel édifice. Il n'en reste que les fondations permettant d'en distinguer approximativement le plan. Il est organisé en deux grandes parties. À l'est, la zone d'apparat, suivant le schéma qui se retrouve dans d'autres palais contemporains (Larsa, Eshnunna, Mari), organisée autour d'une grande cour ouvrant sur deux salles oblongues au nord, la seconde étant identifiée comme la salle du trône. À l'ouest se trouvent plusieurs pièces, comprenant un espace central dont le toit était supporté par six piliers en briques cuites disposés en deux rangées parallèles. Ces espaces devaient correspondre à des zones de stockages et des bureaux administratifs, les pièces résidentielles privées du roi et à de maisonnée devant se trouver à l'étage. Sîn-kashid entreprend la construction de plusieurs temples, un étant dédié à Lugalbanda, l'ancien roi de la cité divinisé, accompagné du bâtiment (le Giparum) servant à loger la grande prêtresse de l'institution, qui est la propre fille du roi, Nish-inishu. L'Eanna est une nouvelle fois restauré à cette période. Quelques lots d'archives datant de cette époque ont été exhumés : des tablettes administratives du palais de Sîn-kashid, et des textes divers datant règnes suivants. L'occupation du site s'est rétractée par rapport à la période précédente, autour des temples et du palais, alors que les jardins et palmeraies ont pris une place importante dans le paysage urbain.
Uruk est alors un royaume peu puissant et peu étendu, menacé en permanence par Larsa, qui en fait peut-être son vassal à certains moments. Les rois de la première dynastie de Babylone, puissance montante du sud mésopotamien à partir du XIXe siècle, sont les alliés de ceux d'Uruk, depuis le mariage de Sîn-kashid avec la fille du roi babylonien Sumu-la-El. Les deux cités coalisés partent en guerre contre Larsa en 1809, mais sont vaincues par son roi Rîm-Sîn. En 1802, ce dernier finit par annexer Uruk en battant son dernier roi, Nabi-ilishu. C'est probablement à ce moment que le palais de Sîn-kashid est détruit. Rîm-Sîn perd la ville quelque temps en 1787, quand Hammurabi de Babylone s'en empare, avant de devoir se retirer. Il parvient finalement à s'emparer de Larsa en 1763, Uruk passant sous sa domination.

L'abandon d'Uruk
Sous le règne du successeur de Hammurabi, Samsu-iluna, les cités de l'extrême-sud mésopotamien se révoltent contre Babylone. Uruk en fait partie, et un dénommé Rîm-Anum y prend le pouvoir quelque temps. Il est connu par des tablettes datées de son règne, documentant notamment le fonctionnement de la « maison des prisonniers » (bīt asīrī), bureau administratif dont dépendent des prisonniers de guerre devenus esclaves et concédés à des institutions et individus. Mais Samsu-iluna reprend les choses en main entre 1740 et 1739, et Uruk repasse sous son autorité comme les autres cités rebelles. Dans ses inscriptions, le roi babylonien proclame avoir abattu les murailles d'Uruk.
Après cet épisode dramatique, la cité d'Uruk est désertée, comme plusieurs de ses voisines (Eridu, Ur, Girsu). Les prospections au sol ont révélé que la taille de l'espace peuplé dans sa région décline considérablement. Une partie de ses habitants se réfugie à Kish, où des tablettes datant des règnes des derniers souverains de la première dynastie de Babylone attestent de la présence de membres du clergé d'Ishtar et Nanaya, déesses originaires d'Uruk, qui ont migré pour sauver le culte de leurs divinités. D'autres Urukéens sont attestés dans des archives administratives de la région de Kish comme travailleurs agricoles. Ce phénomène est sans doute lié aux événements politiques du règne de Samsu-iluna, mais également au contexte économique de l'ancien pays de Sumer, qui semble connaître une crise qui empire au cours du XVIIIe siècle.

La réoccupation du site à la période kassite (v. 1500-1155 av. J.-C.)
Après plusieurs siècles durant lesquels l'occupation du site d'Uruk est résiduelle, la cité se repeuple progressivement dans le courant de la seconde moitié du IIe millénaire, à partir de la période de domination de la dynastie kassite de Babylone, qui prend le contrôle de l'extrême-sud mésopotamien vers le début du XVe siècle. L'occupation de la ville reste cependant très faible au regard des périodes précédentes. Le culte de l'Eanna reprend, sans doute sous l'impulsion des rois kassites : Kurigalzu Ier (début du XIVe siècle) restaure le sanctuaire, et lui fait sans doute une donation de terres pour soutenir son fonctionnement.
L'édifice le mieux connu de cette période est le petit temple situé dans la zone de l'Eanna bâti sous le règne de Kara-indash (fin du XVe siècle), qui est novateur sur plusieurs de ses aspects. Déjà par sa forme : c'est un édifice de taille réduite (14 × 18 mètres de base au sol), avec des tours aux angles de sa façade extérieure. Il est divisé en trois parties : deux pièces qui se suivent au centre, sans doute la cella et le vestibule qui y mène ; et deux couloirs latéraux, ouvrant également sur la cella. L'autre aspect remarquable de ce temple sont les reliefs qui ornaient sa façade. Ils sont réalisés en briques cuites moulées, et représentent des dieux barbus alternant avec des déesses aux vases jaillissant.

La période néo-babylonienne : la richesse de l'Eanna (v. 900-480 av. J.-C.)
Historique de la période
La Basse Mésopotamie traverse des temps difficiles au début du Ier millénaire, à la suite de l'arrivée des populations araméennes et chaldéennes, puis la situation s'améliore à partir de la fin du IXe siècle. Uruk et la campagne environnante connaissent alors une expansion démographique. Sur le plan politique, la période « néo-babylonienne » est marquée dans un premier temps par une instabilité et un éclatement du pouvoir politique, les rois se succédant sur le trône de Babylone au gré d'événements souvent chaotiques, sans continuité dynastique, alors qu'émergent des puissances politiques locales, comme les tribus chaldéennes du Bit Dakkuri qui est installée au nord-ouest d'Uruk en direction de Borsippa, et du Bit Amukkani qui se situe vers le nord-est, ou encore le Bit Yakin au sud vers Eridu. Elles disposent chacune de leurs territoires, avec plusieurs établissements fortifiés et de nombreux hameaux agricoles, témoignant de leur prospérité. L'autre élément-clé de l'évolution politique de la période est l'intervention croissante des Assyriens dans les affaires de la Babylonie, qui culmine par leur prise en contrôle direct de la région dans la seconde moitié du VIIIe siècle. Uruk et sa région sont marquées par ces changements, puisqu'elles passent en partie ou en totalité sous contrôle des confédérations chaldéennes, des rois babyloniens et des rois assyriens en alternance, et que ceux-ci y restaurent parfois des édifices. Malgré son faible rôle politique, Uruk dispose toujours d'un grand prestige religieux, notamment grâce au sanctuaire d'Ishtar, déesse extrêmement populaire à cette période, en particulier auprès des rois assyriens.
À partir de 626, le babylonien Nabopolassar repousse puis défait les Assyriens avec l'aide des Mèdes, et restaure une paix durable en Mésopotamie en fondant l'empire néo-babylonien. Selon une proposition de M. Jursa il pourrait être originaire d'une famille de notables d'Uruk, qui a détenu des fonctions dans l'administration de la cité. La province du Pays de la Mer et Uruk, qui dispose d'une administration autonome avec son propre gouverneur (portant le titre de šakin tēmi), occupent une place importante dans l'administration de l'empire babylonien. Le fils de Nabopolassar, Nabuchodonosor II, et ses successeurs (dont Nabonide) entreprennent de grands travaux, notamment de restauration des canaux d'irrigation, des murailles et des temples, ce dont bénéficient Uruk et son arrière-pays agricole. Cette période se prolonge durant les décennies suivant la conquête de la Babylonie par Cyrus II de Perse en 539, au moins jusqu'aux années 480. C'est de cette époque que datent les nombreuses tablettes administratives et économiques néo-babyloniennes retrouvées à Uruk, illustrant la puissance et le prestige de son grand sanctuaire, l'Eanna (voir plus bas).

Un vaste complexe cultuel
Les VIIIe – Ve siècles d'Uruk sont surtout connus par les fouilles et les documents provenant du secteur du sanctuaire de l'Eanna, qui occupe alors une place majeure dans la vie de la cité. Le sanctuaire lui-même est restauré plusieurs fois durant ces années. Sargon II rebâtit les murs protégeant la zone sacrée. Merodach-baladan II fait construire plusieurs petits temples. D'autres rois assyriens et babyloniens restaurent le complexe par la suite, jusqu'au Perse Cyrus II au début de la domination achéménide. L'Eanna forme alors un vaste complexe cultuel de 330 × 350 mètres, comme il s'en trouve dans les principales villes de Babylonie à cette période. Il est organisé autour de sa ziggurat, et d'un ensemble de cours desservant plusieurs sanctuaires, délimitées par des murs épais qui abritent des pièces et parfois même des temples. Les textes de la période nomment plusieurs bâtiments et cours du complexe cultuel, sans qu'il soit toujours possible de les faire correspondre à ceux qui ont été mis au jour lors des fouilles. Dans la cour entourant la ziggurat, sans doute le « parvis supérieur » (kisallu šaplu) des textes, se trouvent plusieurs temples et chapelles. D'abord le temple supérieur (gigunû) surmontant la tour à degrés et qui a disparu entièrement, puis deux nouveaux petits temples construits sous Merodach-baladan II situés devant celle-ci, dédiés aux divinités principales de l'Eanna, Ishtar (é-nir-gál-an-na, « Maison du prince du Ciel ») et Nanaya (é-hi-li-an-na, « Maison de la luxuriance du Ciel »). Un troisième a été fouillé dans le mur d'enceinte situé au nord-est de la ziggurat. Ils ont tous un plan « babylonien » classique caractérisé par la succession alignée cour-vestibule-cella. Dans le côté opposé de la grande cour (au nord) se trouve un bâtiment où ont été retrouvées les archives du temple. Cette zone comprend des bâtiments connus par les textes cultuels qui n'ont pas pu être localisés de façon assurée, comme le bīt hilṣi et le bīt terêt, ce dernier servant peut-être pour des oracles. La deuxième grande cour, sans doute le « parvis inférieur » (kisallu elû), située à l'est de la première, abrite le temple de Kara-indash qui est toujours en usage. Il est bordé par un temple dédié à Ningishzida, inclus dans l'enceinte, qui n'a été dégagé que de façon incomplète, mais semble avoir été de plan classique. Au sud, les deux cours sont bordées par d'autres cours plus petites délimitées par une enceinte extérieure. Le complexe sacré est entouré de zones résidentielles denses, où vivent notamment ses desservants.

La vie religieuse d'Uruk : divinités et culte
La vie religieuse d'Uruk est comme aux autres périodes dominée par sa divinité majeure, Ishtar. Sa relation avec l'autre grand dieu de la ville, le dieu du Ciel Anu, n'est pas claire : bien qu'elle soit couramment présentée comme la fille du dieu-lune Sîn, lui-même petit-fils d'Anu, d'autres traditions en font la fille d'Anu, voire sa compagne. Dans les textes cultuels et même mythologiques, elle occupe constamment une place prépondérante par rapport à l'autre grand dieu, plutôt présenté comme une divinité patriarcale ancienne au rôle effacé. Le temple d'Ishtar est alors prépondérant, et c'est donc le culte de cette déesse qui est le plus important et qui se voit le plus dans les textes qui proviennent de l'Eanna. Ishtar d'Uruk y apparaît sous l'épithète de « Dame d'Uruk », alors que la seconde divinité principale du sanctuaire, Nanaya, est dite « Reine d'Uruk », suivant une bipartition entre deux déesses tutélaires qui se retrouve à Babylone et à Nippur à la même période. Une troisième déesse, Bēltu-ša-Rēš, complète cette triade de déesses tutélaires de l'Eanna qui sont peut-être toutes considérées comme des hypostases d'Ishtar. D'autres temples du secteur de l'Eanna hébergent d'autres divinités, formant une sorte de cour auprès des déesses majeures, et d'autres sanctuaires se trouvent dans le reste de la ville, consacrés notamment à Nergal, Ninurta, ou encore Marduk qui occupe une position plus importante à l'époque de l'empire babylonien en tant que divinité patronne de cet État.
Les offrandes reçues par les deux grandes déesses de l'Eanna sont riches et variées : des denrées alimentaires, des vêtements et bijoux pour orner leurs statues, des meubles et autres objets, etc.. Les offrandes alimentaires quotidiennes d'Ishtar sont particulièrement impressionnantes, puisqu'il a été évalué quelles nécessitent 360 litres d'orge et 66 de froment, soit de quoi subvenir aux besoins journaliers de 100 personnes suivant les rations alimentaires de l'époque. Elle reçoit également des animaux, notamment des moutons et des bœufs, et des boissons. Ces offrandes alimentaires sont en fait redistribuées au personnel cultuel et au roi qui a la meilleure part, en tant que premier pourvoyeur du culte. Toutes ces offrandes nécessitent la participation d'artisans, de brasseurs, de cuisiniers, et d'un personnel spécialisé dans l'exécution des rituels quotidiens, le tout constituant une vaste population gravitant autour du temple. Les charges de culte peuvent mobiliser leurs détenteurs en permanence, ou bien être divisées en portions de services ne requérant leur participation que quelques jours voire une partie de la journée, suivant le principe des prébendes. Chacune de ces charges implique des revenus ou l'attribution de terres, la participation au culte étant alors un moyen d'enrichissement et de prestige pour les élites locales.

L'administration et les activités économiques du temple
Un lot d'archives conséquent a été exhumé lors des fouilles clandestines dans l'Eanna, nous informant sur les activités économiques du temple aux VIIe – VIe siècles (d'environ 650 à 500 av. J.-C.). Elles sont constituées d'au moins 10 000 tablettes et fragments, dans les pièces bordant la cour principale du sanctuaire (au nord-est). Il s'agit pour l'essentiel de tablettes administratives, notamment des listes d'offrandes, les tablettes littéraires étant environ 250. Autour de 2 000 tablettes provenant de fouilles clandestines semblent également provenir de l'Eanna, comprenant des tablettes administratives similaires, et environ 400 lettres.
Le temple est alors le principal acteur économique de la région d'Uruk. Sa gestion est assurée par un intendant en chef (šatammu), et un délégué en chef (qīpu), assistés par le « scribe de l'Eanna » (ṭupšar Eanna), qui dirige les scribes du temple et qui est une spécificité locale. Ce dernier est écarté sous le règne de Nabonide au profit d'un agent royal qui surveille les activités du temple : le contrôle du pouvoir sur le sanctuaire se renforce donc (le roi nomme également un agent chargé de gérer sa propre caisse servant au financement de l'Eanna). Ces administrateurs ont avant tout la gestion des affaires économiques du sanctuaire. Ils s'occupent également d'autres temples dont la gestion leur a été concédée. Le personnel religieux chargé du culte (ērib bīti) est quant à lui supervisé par un Grand prêtre. Ces personnages ont tous une grande importance dans la vie de la cité d'Uruk. Ils se succèdent souvent à un même poste au sein de dynasties familiales, comme celles des descendants de Dabibi (souvent scribes de l'Eanna) et Sîn-leqi-unninni (dont une branche se spécialise dans la gestion du bétail du temple).

Il a été évalué que l'Eanna possède selon les estimations entre 10 000 et 17 000 hectares de terres cultivables. Celles-ci s'étendent grâce à des donations, avant tout celles faites par les souverains. Ses palmeraies sont particulièrement bien connues : le temple en possède jusque dans la ville même, et elles lui rapporteraient environ 18 000 hectolitres de dattes par an. Elles sont concédées en fermage et exploitées par des « jardiniers » (nukurribu) salariés. Les champs céréaliers, qui représentent la majorité des terres du temple, sont quant à eux exploités par des « laboureurs » (ikkribu) sous contrat de fermage avec le temple, ou de façon directe par le biais de dépendants du temple, des « oblats » (širku), une catégorie sociale semi-libre (qui peut être rapprochée d'une forme de servage) organisée en équipes de labour dirigées par des chefs. La gestion des terres du temple est en partie supervisée par le personnage chargé de l'irrigation (gugallu), qui coordonne également les travaux agricoles avec ses assistants. Certains champs peuvent également être octroyés à des personnes indépendantes du temple contre redevance. Les agents du temple estiment les rendements attendus à partir desquels ils déterminent la redevance à verser par les divers locataires des terres. Un dernier système d'attribution des terres est connu à partir du règne de Nabonide, la « ferme générale », cas dans lequel un domaine de taille importante est concédé contre redevance à des notables (parfois issus du personnel cultuel) qui doivent le faire exploiter par leurs propres moyens humains et matériels.
L'Eanna dispose également de nombreux troupeaux, avant tout d'ovins (plus de 100 000 selon les estimations), destinés à produire de la laine et à être sacrifiés aux dieux. Ils sont envoyés en saison chaude vers les zones de pâtures situées sur le Haut Tigre, dans la région de Takrit, sous la direction de pasteurs (rē'û) et la surveillance d'archers rétribués par le temple. Les éleveurs passent un contrat avec le temple qui implique qu'ils remettent une quantité déterminée d'animaux et de laine. Les jeunes agneaux servent souvent pour les sacrifices. La laine fait quant à elle l'objet de ventes, et c'est sans doute par ce biais que le temple se procure la majeure partie de son argent. Les bœufs, quoique sacrifiés également, sont avant tout élevés pour être des animaux de trait. L'Eanna dispose également d'une grande quantité de volaille, servant pour les offrandes, confiées là aussi à des éleveurs sous contrat.
La campagne urukéenne est alors une zone irriguée riche, parcourue par plusieurs canaux servant également pour le transport fluvial quand le niveau de l'eau est suffisamment haut. Le principal est le « Canal du Roi », un ancien bras naturel de l'Euphrate devenu un cours d'eau artificiel après le déplacement du cours du fleuve, joignant la ville par le nord-ouest ; le second grand canal est le Takkiru, qui semble venir du sud-ouest ou de l'ouest. Plusieurs canaux secondaires sont dérivés de ces cours principaux pour arroser Uruk et la campagne environnante. Le Canal du Roi parvient dans la ville jusqu'au « quai de l'Eanna », à proximité du complexe cultuel. L'espace urbain est alors loin d'être recouvert par l'urbanisation, puisque des champs et des marais se trouvent à l'intérieur des murailles.
Le temple d'Ishtar est également actif dans d'autres activités. Il commandite des opérations commerciales à longue distance, confiées à des marchands, qui sont indépendants du temple et s'organisent dans des sortes de firmes commerciales. Leur sont confiés des achats à effectuer avec de l'argent pour ceux-ci, et aussi une autre somme sous forme d'un prêt commercial à intérêt pour que les marchands puissent profiter du voyage pour réaliser des affaires pour leur propre compte. Le trajet le mieux connu est celui qui relie Uruk aux cités marchandes du Levant. À une échelle locale, les marchands se chargent d'écouler les surplus agricoles du temple.
L'Eanna embauche également des artisans pour la confection d'objets du culte et d'autres servant pour le fonctionnement courant du temple. Il confie la matière première à l'artisan pour qu'il effectue la tâche, et lors de la livraison les gestionnaires du temple inspectent le produit fini et vérifient que les matières premières aient bien été utilisées, des cas de vols de matières premières par des artisans étant attestés par les textes juridiques. Les artisans sont notamment des orfèvres (kuttimu) et joailliers (kabšarru) chargés de travailler les pierres et les métaux précieux, aussi de charpentiers (nagāru) pour la réalisation de meubles et vantaux de portes, ainsi que de tailleurs de pierre/lapicides (purkullu), pour le travail des pierres précieuses, sceaux-cylindres et plus largement les pierres. Les artisans les plus expérimentés sont qualifiés de « maîtres » (ūmmanu) et sont des hommes libres tenus en haute estime, même si d'autres appartiennent aux oblats du temple. Certains de ces artisans se déplacent dans d'autres villes pour obtenir de la matière première. Ils sont organisés comme les autres travailleurs des temples en unité ayant un chef, responsable devant les autorités du temple, organisation qui ne constitue pas à proprement parler une « guilde », et en général il est attendu qu'ils travaillent exclusivement pour le sanctuaire (sans doute là aussi pour éviter les détournements de matière première). D'autres artisans sont spécialisés dans la confection des vêtements des statues de culte, comme les tisserands (išparu), à qui sont fournis de la laine et du lin, parfois teints (« multicolores », birmi), des blanchisseurs (pūṣāyu) blanchissent les fibres de lin et les tissent, tandis que des laveurs (ašlāku) prennent en charge le nettoyage des vêtements employés dans le culte. Le temple emploie également des artisans spécialisés dans la fourniture d'aliments et de boissons aux dieux (boulangers, brasseurs, presseurs d'huile), des potiers, des forgerons, des vanniers. Plusieurs de ces charges étant en fait inscrites dans un cadre cultuel, elles sont rémunérées suivant le principe de la prébende et dotées de plus de prestige, mais la plupart des métiers artisanaux sont accomplis par des oblats ou des travailleurs libres, rémunérés par des rations.
Enfin, d'autres tablettes montrent que le temple possède plusieurs résidences urbaines qu'il loue à des artisans ou certains de ses dépendants, le prélèvement des loyers étant confié à des entrepreneurs indépendants.
Des lots d'archives privées de la même période, bien plus modestes que les archives du temple, fournissent d'autres informations sur la vie économique de la période : 32 tablettes, surtout des contrats de prêt et de vente de champ, de la famille Shamshea, pour la période 700 à 593 ; 81 tablettes de la famille du cuisinier du temple Bel-suppê-muhur, sur la période de 570 à 546, surtout des contrats de prébende ; 202 tablettes de Nabû-etir-napshati, un membre de la famille des Egibi, originaire de Babylone, datées de la seconde moitié du VIe siècle av. J.-C., surtout des contrats de prêt ; sept tablettes des fils de Bel-ushalim, de la famille Kuri, des prêts et divisions d'héritage, de la période 626-601.

La prépondérance du temple d'Anu durant la période tardive (v. 350-100 av. J.-C.)
Sous la domination achéménide (539-330), l'Eanna perd sa prépondérance dans la cité d'Uruk au profit du sanctuaire d'Anu, le Bit Resh. Celui-ci tend à concentrer la gestion de l'essentiel du culte des sanctuaires de la ville d'Uruk, dont l'Eanna. Son apogée est évident dans les archives de la période hellénistique (domination des Séleucides, IIIe – IIe siècles) qui nous sont parvenues de la cité. Les périodes de domination séleucide et parthe voient le sud de la Basse Mésopotamie connaître une croissance démographique et économique importante. Uruk, la plus grande cité de la région et sans doute son centre administratif, en profite beaucoup : suivant les prospections, elle est alors occupée sur environ 300 hectares, et des espaces résidentiels et artisanaux ont été identifiés en plusieurs endroits du site. Elle dispose apparemment d'un statut particulier sous les Séleucides, ces rois nommant directement son gouverneur.

Un nouveau contexte religieux
La fin de l'empire babylonien et le début de l'empire perse voient le contexte religieux d'Uruk se modifier profondément : les archives de l'Eanna cessent vers la fin du règne de Darius Ier et le début de celui de Xerxès Ier, peut-être en lien avec la répression d'une révolte dans la région par ce dernier, événement sur la réalité duquel les spécialistes débattent. Quoi qu'il en soit, la figure majeure du panthéon d'Uruk à la période suivante (et peut-être dès le milieu du IVe siècle) est Anu, associé à sa parèdre Antu, alors qu'Ishtar et Nanaya restent importantes mais subordonnées à cette nouvelle paire majeure. Anu prend alors à Uruk les traits d'une divinité suprême, chef des dieux, similaires à ceux de Marduk durant l'empire babylonien. Il se pourrait que le retrait de l'influence babylonienne sur la ville après la chute de l'empire ait entraîné une réaction à Uruk, où l'affirmation d'une vieille divinité locale servirait à marquer l'autonomie nouvelle face à l'ancienne puissance dominante, accompagnant le développement économique de la ville. L'Eanna est restauré et continue de fonctionner, mais il perd de l'importance et son culte est dirigé par le nouveau temple d'Anu et d'Antum, le Bit Resh (Bīt Rēš ou é-sag, quelque chose comme « Maison (qui a la) primauté »), où le culte principal d'Ishtar et Nanaya est transporté. Le temple d'Anu centralise également le culte du grand temple de la ville voisine de Larsa, l'Ebabbar du dieu-soleil Shamash.
Cette évolution s'accompagne d'un vaste programme de construction, au plus tard vers le milieu du IIIe siècle (il est évoqué dans une inscription d'Anu-uballit/Nikarchos datée de 244), qui est aussi la dernière réalisation d'un sanctuaire de tradition mésopotamienne connue. Il est partagé entre Anu et sa parèdre Antu et les déesses Ishtar et Nanaya, qui occupent les deux grands ensembles du complexe. Le Bit Resh à proprement parler, dédié aux deux premiers, occupe un espace de 213 × 167 mètres, comprenant en tout plus de 22 chapelles. Il est organisé autour d'au moins neuf cours. Le sanctuaire des deux divinités principales est un bâtiment de 74,60 × 52,75 mètres. Une large ziggurat (é-šár-ra, « Maison de la totalité (de l'Univers) ») de base carrée d'environ 110 mètres de côté au sol, dont il ne reste aujourd'hui que peu de traces, domine le tout. Au sud, une autre grande construction est érigée à la même période, l'Irigal, protégé par une enceinte intérieure de 205 × 198 mètres, où sont notamment vénérées Ishtar et Nanaya. Il est restauré en 201 par le gouverneur de la cité, Anu-uballit, qui porte aussi le nom grec Kephalôn. À l'extérieur de la ville, au nord-est, un temple dédié à une fête religieuse, le Bit Akitu (Bīt akītu, « Maison de l'akītu »), est construit vers la même période. Il est de plan carré, de 140 mètres de côté et est organisé autour d'une grande cour de 90 mètres de côté, ouvrant sur une vaste pièce de 31,5 mètres de long servant pour la fête akītu. Un texte montre ainsi une procession partant du Bit Resh et rejoignant Bit Akitu lors d'une telle cérémonie.

Le culte d'Uruk à la période hellénistique est bien connu grâce aux textes cultuels de cette époque qui ont été mis au jour dans le temple et dans des bibliothèques privées. Les rituels liés au culte d'Anu et d'Antu suivent l'antique tradition mésopotamienne, même si de nouveaux rituels se constituent aux côtés d'autres plus anciens, bien qu'il soit difficile de savoir si tous les rituels recopiés étaient effectivement pratiqués. À côté des rituels d'offrandes quotidiennes, plusieurs fêtes rythment l'année liturgique. Ainsi, une fête nocturne appelée bayātu (quelque chose comme « veillée » ou « vigile ») est dédiée au couple divin ; sa fonction est peut-être d'assurer la pérennité de la lumière dans un feu sacré, en lien avec les astres auxquels les deux divinités sont assimilés. Après des libations et des sacrifices effectués dans une cour du temple, des prêtres montent sur le sommet de la ziggurat et attendent l'apparition des étoiles divines pour entonner des chants liturgiques puis effectuer d'autres sacrifices avant d'allumer une torche transportant un feu sacré, à laquelle on a effectué un « lavage de bouche », rituel servant à insuffler de la vie dans des objets sacrés. Le feu sacré est ensuite transporté dans d'autres endroits du temple, puis éteint, et le rituel se poursuit dans le reste de la ville où des torches sont allumées en différents endroits jusqu'à l'aube, servant peut-être à purifier les lieux. Toute la communauté se retrouve donc autour du culte des divinités principales à cette occasion.

Les élites d'Uruk
Uruk est donc aux IIIe – IIe siècles une ville disposant d'une relative autonomie, autour de ses institutions héritées des périodes plus anciennes et adaptées au nouveau contexte de l'empire séleucide, qui leur laisse manifestement plus de libertés que l'empire néo-babylonien, voire celui des Achéménides (mais cette dernière période est mal connue). La ville est dirigée par un groupe de plusieurs familles constituant les élites locales, impliquées dans l'administration de la cité et/ou du temple d'Anu (les deux se confondant), et bien connues grâce aux sources écrites cunéiformes de cette période. Souvent ces familles étaient déjà présentes durant la période de l'empire néo-babylonien. Elles sont toutes liées au temple, que ce soit par la détention de charges administratives ou cultuelles, qui donnent droit à des revenus, notamment ceux associés à des prébendes qui sont cumulables et peuvent fournir l'occasion de disposer de plusieurs terres. Ces activités sont souvent combinées à des affaires menées en dehors du cadre du temple, notamment la possession et la location de terrains ou de maisons. Ces familles sont nommées en fonction d'un ancêtre fondateur qui est parfois un personnage légendaire. La famille de Sîn-leqe-uninni, déjà liée à l'Eanna à la période précédente, qui fournit une dynastie de lamentateurs (kalû) au temple d'Anu, se rattache ainsi à la personne qui aurait rédigé la version finale de l'Épopée de Gilgamesh à la fin du IIe millénaire. Une autre famille riche est celle des descendants de Hunzu, qui dispose d'un patrimoine diversifié et de charges importantes. Toutes ces familles sont liées par des relations matrimoniales ou professionnelles.
Le plus puissant groupe familial est celui des descendants d'Ah'ûtu, dont Anu-uballit qui porte aussi le nom grec de Kephalôn, ou son frère Anu-belshunu, contemporains d'Antiochos III. Ils ont un riche patrimoine et sont impliqués dans l'administration de la cité. Cette famille dispose des plus hautes charges administratives, à savoir celle de gouverneur (šaknu, correspondant au grec epistates) au nom du roi séleucide qui le nomme en personne, et celle de dirigeant des affaires du temple et de la ville, charge tantôt nommée « chef des officiers de la ville » (rab ša rēš āli) ou « préposé aux affaires du temple » (paqdu ou ša bīt ilāni). Un autre personnage local important ayant vécu plus tôt porte aussi le nom akkadien Anu-uballiṭ et le nom grec Nikarchos, qu'il a reçu par décret du roi Antiochos II. Ces personnages issus de l'élite locale servent donc de relais avec le pouvoir central, et l'usage de deux noms illustre cette double identité. Le pouvoir royal est aussi représenté sur place par un « chreophylax d'Orchoï » connu par des empreintes de sceaux, chargé notamment du prélèvement des taxes. Les textes mentionnent l'existence d'un « palais royal » (bīt šarri) dans la ville, mais il n'a pas été retrouvé sur place. La question de savoir si ces relations poussées avec le pouvoir séleucide et cette hellénisation des élites d'Uruk pourraient indiquer le fait que la ville ait alors reçu le statut de cité grecque (polis) reste en débat.
Une autre manifestation d'un pouvoir local se repère en périphérie d'Uruk, dans des tombes retrouvées sous deux tumuli mis au jour à Frehat en-Nufegi, auparavant datés de la période parthe mais qui ont depuis été remontés à la période séleucide. Leur riche matériel funéraire illustre la puissance des personnes qui y reposent, qui ont atteint un niveau de richesse et de prestige important. Il s'agit d'un des lieux urukéens où se retrouve le plus l'influence grecque, puisqu'on y a mis au jour une amphore à vin, des strigiles, et une couronne de type grec constituée de lamelles d'or en forme de feuilles d'olivier. L'identité des occupants de ces sépultures est inconnue ; en l'état actuel des connaissances, les meilleurs candidats restent des hauts administrateurs issus d'une grande famille locale et proches du pouvoir royal, à savoir les deux Anu-uballit dont le rôle a pu être celui de quasi-princes locaux, comme l'illustre l'implication de l'un d'entre eux dans la restauration d'un sanctuaire et leur volonté de se rapprocher du modèle grec par l'adoption d'un nom dans cette langue.

Un des derniers foyers de la culture mésopotamienne antique
Si Uruk est connu pour être l'endroit où les plus vieilles formes de l'écriture mésopotamienne sont attestées, c'est aussi l'un des derniers endroits où la pratique de celle-ci est connue avec Babylone.
Plusieurs lots de tablettes de la période séleucide ont été mis au jour à Uruk, et ont été qualifiés de bibliothèques en raison de leur contenu rituel, technique et littéraire. Ils ont été pour la plupart trouvés en deux endroits différents. Le premier groupe provient du Bit Resh, où une partie des tablettes a été trouvée lors de fouilles clandestines, avant que les fouilles régulières ne repèrent une salle servant de bibliothèque dans la partie sud-est du temple. Il s'agit de tablettes de prêtres-lamentateurs (kalû), qui occupent une place majeure dans les rituels. Les prêtres dont les activités sont documentées ici sont les membres de la famille des descendants de Sîn-leqe-uninni, en premier lieu un dénommé Anu-belshunu, qui occupent cette charge depuis longtemps. Les tablettes du Bit Resh sont de nature variée : des textes mathématiques, astronomiques, mais aussi des rituels, ainsi que des textes privés conservés par les prêtres dans le temple, etc. L'autre groupe de textes provient de plusieurs niveaux d'une même résidence, occupée par des exorcistes (ašipu), en dernier lieu la famille des descendants d'Ekur-zakir, dont le membre le mieux connu est Iqishaya. Il s'agit là de tablettes essentiellement destinées à l'activité exorcistique, dont la famille détient la charge au Bit Resh sur plusieurs générations.
Les tablettes scolaires, rituelles et littéraires d'Uruk sont donc essentielles pour connaître les derniers traits de la culture mésopotamienne, et la façon dont elle est transmise au sein des familles de notables qui officiaient pour l'un des derniers grands sanctuaires de la région en activité. L'intérêt de ces textes pour l'histoire religieuse a déjà été évoqué, et à cela s'ajoute le fait que nombre d'entre eux donnent des renseignements sur les mathématiques et surtout l'astronomie/astrologie, discipline-reine des derniers lettrés mésopotamiens. Les tablettes sont souvent des textes scolaires, qui montrent que l'enseignement du cunéiforme et de sa culture s'effectuent à l'époque hellénistique comme durant les grands siècles de la culture mésopotamienne, en deux phases : d'abord l'apprentissage des bases de l'écriture par l'apprenti (šumallu) autour de quelques textes essentiels, notamment des listes lexicales ; puis un stade d'apprentissage spécialisé où l'étudiant se forme dans une des trois spécialités cultuelles qui dominent alors : devin, exorciste ou lamentateur. Le corpus de textes classiques ou canoniques de la tradition mésopotamienne se retrouve ainsi à Uruk, à savoir des listes lexicales et textes rituels ou techniques standardisés depuis les siècles précédents. Les savants d'Uruk pratiquent parfois une sorte de savoir ésotérique, en complexifiant l'écriture, en pratiquant un langage codé. Certains textes anciens, comme l'Épopée de Gilgamesh, sont remaniés et réinterprétés dans un sens différent à celui des périodes précédentes. La culture d'Uruk porte en fin de compte peu de traces d'hellénisation, malgré la rédaction de quelques textes dits « gréco-babyloniens », des listes lexicales ou textes savants comportant une partie en cunéiforme, et sa transcription (et non sa traduction) en caractères alphabétiques grecs, sans doute pour faciliter sa compréhension dans un monde où les utilisateurs du cunéiforme se raréfient face au triomphe des alphabets araméen et grec.

Les dernières périodes
Sous la domination parthe (qui est définitive après 125 av. J.-C. et s'achève en 224 de notre ère), Uruk reste un grand centre provincial. Elle est peut-être incorporée dans le royaume de Characène, vassal des Parthes, mais y occuperait une position périphérique face à la capitale, Spasinou Charax, mieux située car disposant d'un accès direct sur le Golfe. La documentation cunéiforme s'arrête autour de 100 av. J.-C., un contrat daté de 108 av. J.-C. montrant que le temple d'Anu fonctionne encore. Un texte astronomique isolé daterait de 79/80 ap. J.-C., ce qui en ferait le plus récent texte cunéiforme connu. L'histoire de la ville par la suite est très mal connue et la ville semble décliner lentement, même si au tournant de notre ère le géographe Strabon connaît encore les habitants d'Uruk (en grec Orchènoï) comme étant un groupe parmi les prestigieux astronomes « chaldéens » (entendus comme les habitants de la Mésopotamie du sud). Une inscription isolée en grec du IIe siècle ap. J.-C. a été retrouvée sur le site mais n'apporte pas d'informations utiles.

La construction la plus importante réalisée à la période parthe est plus tardive. Il s'agit d'un temple entouré d'une enceinte sacrée mesurant 60 × 63 mètres, construit aux alentours de 100 de notre ère, et qui reflète un mélange de traditions mésopotamiennes et gréco-romaines. D'après l'inscription en grec qui y a été retrouvée, il est dédié à une divinité inconnue par ailleurs, nommée Gareus, ce qui montre que le culte ancien a disparu. Il a été construit par un peuple nommé Dollamenoi, peut-être lié à un peuple du même nom que Strabon situe en Haute Mésopotamie, ce qui expliquerait alors ses ressemblances avec un temple contemporain retrouvé à Hatra, une des grandes cités du nord mésopotamien à cette époque. Le petit temple qui se trouve au centre de l'enceinte mesure 13,7 × 10,5 mètres, et ses murs sont encore bien conservés. L'intérieur, reflétant une évolution des traditions babyloniennes, est divisé en deux parties par deux courts murs latéraux, un petit vestibule et une cella de plan carré, cette dernière comprenant une niche dans l'axe de l'entrée. Des objets antérieurs à la période parthe, dont des sceaux-cylindres du Dynastique archaïque, ont été entreposés dans le sanctuaire. Le décor extérieur du temple, d'inspiration gréco-romaine, est constitué de plusieurs moitiés ou trois-quarts de colonnes séparées par des arcades aveugles. Devant l'édifice, six bases de colonnes alignées subsistent, rappelant les dispositifs des temples pseudoptériptéraux gréco-romains. Des chapiteaux de type ionique qui devaient appartenir aux colonnes surmontant ces bases ont été retrouvés à proximité.
Un autre édifice cultuel de la période parthe a été mis au jour : ses ruines sont de forme absidiale, et il a été interprété comme un mithraeum par Lenzen, mais il pourrait s'agir d'une église d'une des premières communautés chrétiennes ou gnostiques de Mésopotamie du Sud. La ville d'Uruk connaît en tout cas un déclin marqué durant la période tardive de la domination parthe, et finit par être abandonnée sous les premiers rois Sassanides (après 224 de notre ère), les dernières traces d'occupations datables étant des pièces au nom d'Ardashir, premier roi sassanide. La région d'Uruk semble alors progressivement devenir de plus en plus marécageuse, et ses agglomérations principales sont des sites nouveaux.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
(en) Rainer Michael Boehmer, « Uruk-Warka », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 5, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 294-298
Francis Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, Éditions Robert Laffont, coll. « Bouquins », 2001
Francis Joannès, La Mésopotamie au Ier millénaire avant J.-C., Paris, Armand Colin, coll. « U », 2000
Agnès Benoit, Art et archéologie : les civilisations du Proche-Orient ancien, Paris, RMN, coll. « Manuels de l'école du Louvre », 2003
Jean-Claude Margueron, « Sanctuaires sémitiques », dans Jacques Briend et Édouard Cothenet (dir.), Supplément au Dictionnaire de la Bible fasc. 64 B-65, Letouzey et Ané, 1991, col. 1104-1258
(en) Robert McCormick Adams et Hans-Jörg Nissen, The Uruk Countryside, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1972
(en) Paul-Alain Beaulieu, The Pantheon of Uruk during the Neo-Babylonian Period, Leyde et Boston, Brill, coll. « Cuneiform Monographs », 2003
(de) Nicola Crüsemann, Margarete van Ess, Beate Salje et Markus Hilgert (dir.), Uruk : 5000 Jahre Megacity, Petersberg, Imhof, 2013
(en) Nicola Crüsemann, Margarete van Ess, Beate Salje et Markus Hilgert (dir.), Uruk : First City of the Ancient World, Los Angeles, J. Paul Getty Museum, 2019 (traduction anglaise du précédent)
(de) Margarete van Ess, « Uruk. B. Archäologisch », dans Reallexikon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. XIV, 2015, p. 457-487
(de) Margarete van Ess (dir.), Uruk : Altorientalische Metropole und Kulturzentrum, 8. Internationales Colloquium der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft 25.-26. April 2013, Berlin, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz, 2021

Voir aussi
Liens externes
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative à la bande dessinée : Comic Vine 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

(de) Uruk (Warka), sur le site de l'Institut allemand d'archéologie ;
Photos d'Uruk sur le site de l'Université de Chicago
Et l'humanité inventa la ville, article du Monde, 25/01/2018

Articles connexes
Période d'Uruk
Sumer
Babylone (royaume)
Gilgamesh
Débuts de l'écriture en Mésopotamie
Période des dynasties archaïques

 Portail de l’histoire   Portail de l'Antiquité   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’Irak   Portail de la Mésopotamie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 1,929
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Uruk
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Mesopotamia is in the Middle East, mainly in present-day Iraq, with parts of it in Syria and Turkey and influence extending into what are now Iran and the Persian Gulf states. The name translates literally as 'between rivers', and an alternate term is the Land of the Two Rivers. The rivers involved are the Tigris and Euphrates; both rise in the mountains of Eastern Anatolia, run more-or-less parallel, then join near Basra to form the Shatt al-Arab which flows into the Persian Gulf.
The region had several of the world's earliest civilizations and has dozens of archeological sites, including many  UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Unfortunately, many have been damaged or destroyed by Da'esh, the so-called Islamic State.
As of mid-2024, most of the region is too dangerous to visit; see warnings in the Syria and Iraq articles.

## Understand
Mesopotamia forms part of a historically important region called the Fertile Crescent; the other main part is the Levant. The region was one of the cradles of civilisation, where farming and cities first arose.
Mesopotamia was one of the great Bronze Age civilizations, along with Ancient Egypt, Ancient China, the Indus Valley Civilisation and others. All of those built cities and empires, and developed or imported innovations such as bronze-working, irrigation, writing, glass, mathematics, natural science, measurements of time, city planning, and the wheel. Historians debate who was first with each, and Mesopotamia is a candidate for most of them.
Many empires rose and fell here—3245.51 Sumer , 33.144.12 Akkad , 32.544.53 Babylon , and 3643.34 Assyria  are the best-known.
Nearby ancient kingdoms which they influenced, traded with, sometimes invaded, and sometimes were invaded by included 29.952.41 Elam  and the  Medes  in what is now Iran (the Mede capital 34.806548.5162472 Ecbatana  is now Hamadan), and 38.543.34253 Urartu  around Lake Van. The 37.64956939.891864 Mitanni  or Hurrians originated further west, but at one point their empire extended into northeast Mesopotamia.
Mesopotamia has a prominent role in the Abrahamic religions — Judaism, Christianity and Islam — and a shared history with the Holy Land. The Israelites' exile in Babylon around 600 BCE is well described in the Old Testament, and is one of the oldest Biblical events supported by historical records. Like many other ancient empires, Babylon primarily became known among Europeans through the Bible.
The land later became a subject under many empires: the Hittites, the Hellenic Empire of Alexander the Great and his successors, the Roman Empire and its successor the Byzantine Empire, various incarnations of the Persian Empire, the Mongol Empire, the Caliphate of Baghdad (see Islamic Golden Age), the Ottoman Empire, and the British Empire.
Mesopotamia has been devastated by war many times in history, including in the 21st century. Iraq and Syria are, as of 2025, still dangerous destinations; see warnings in those articles.

## Talk
Most languages native to the region — including Akkadian which was the main language of the Akkadian, Babylonian and Assyrian empires, and Aramaic which became important later — were from the Semitic family which includes Arabic and Hebrew. Sumerian — spoken in Sumer and used by priests and scholars for centuries after Akkadian replaced it in general use — was a language isolate, unrelated to any other known language.
Tower of Babel. It is not clear whether this Bible story has any historical basis, but if it does the tower was certainly in Mesopotamia. Possibilities include Etemenanki in Babylon and the Great Ziggurat of Ur. Some have suggested Sumerian was mankind's original tongue, before the Babel incident.
Today Arabic is the main language of the region, but Turkish, Kurdish, and Syriac are also spoken in some areas.

## Destinations
This article focuses on the great Mesopotamian civilisations of the Bronze Age; see Fertile Crescent for archeological sites dating back before those.

## Sumer
Sumer was the earliest known civilisation, starting before 5000 BCE. Quite likely it was the first to enter the Bronze Age, and the first to evolve from city-states to an empire.
A  UNESCO World Heritage Site near Nasiriyah in the marshes of southern Iraq includes the ruins of several Sumerian cities:
30.8158345.995831 Eridu. Possibly the world's oldest city, dating to about 5400 BCE.
31.32416745.6372222 Uruk. Important center during the urbanisation of Sumer, circa 4000-3200 BCE. Probably the world's largest city (40,000 plus suburbs) around 3100 BCE. Uruk lasted a long time and was finally abandoned in the 7th century CE.
30.96222246.1044443 Ur (Ur of the Chaldees). Capital of the Sumerian Empire — the first empire in the region and possibly first anywhere — from about 2600 BCE. The town is mentioned in the Bible (Genesis 11:28 and 11:31) and the usual interpretation is that Abraham set off from there on his journey to find the Promised Land.      (updated Apr 2019)
31.28583345.8536114 Larsa. Known from about 2500 BCE, and an important city in several empires. It had its own small empire circa 2000-1700 BCE.
31.41138946.4072225 Lagash (Tell al-Hiba). Lagash was an independent city-state under two dynasties, circa 2550-2300 and 2230-2110 BCE. In between it was part of the Akkadian Empire, and later of Ur's empire. Nowadays it is one of the largest archaeological sites in Mesopotamia.
32.12611145.2308336 Nippur. An important city in Sumerian, Akkadian and Babylonian empires, partly because it was a major center of their religion. Now an archaeological site with many temples and a ziggurat. It lasted longer than other Sumerian cities, and was finally abandoned somewhere around 1000 CE.
32.54027844.6047227 Kish (near Babylon). Occupied from the Ubaid period (c.5300-4300 BCE), important in several empires, abandoned sometime after 750 CE, now only ruins.
31.93351245.2852078 Isin (Ishan al-Bahriyat). Goes back to at least the Early Dynastic Period, 2900-2350 BCE. At times it had its own rulers, even a small empire, but mostly it was part of various other empires.
34.54944440.899 Mari (Tell Hariri) (near Deir-az-Zur). Originally a Sumerian city, from around 2500 BCE, on the Euphrates. Sometimes the capital of small empires, at other times part of the Akkadian, Babylonian and Assyrian empires. Abandoned and forgotten during the Hellenistic period.
36.19111144.00944410 Erbil (Arbela). Once a Sumerian town, Erbil remained important in all the later empires. it has a citadel from the Neo-Assyrian period which is a  UNESCO World Heritage Site. Today it is the capital of Iraqi Kurdistan and has population around 1.6 million. It has several museums, some with exhibits from ancient times.
36.8539.216711 Harran (near Urfa in Turkey, close to the Syrian border). Probably originally a Sumerian trading post before 2000 BCE.Local legend has it as the birthplace of both Abraham and Job, and the Cave of Abraham is a pilgrimage site for Muslims. One version (e.g. in the King James Bible) of Abraham's journey to find the promised land has him starting from Ur, and travelling via Harran. Another version has his family immigrating from Ur to Harran, then Abraham being born there and starting his journey there.Later it became an Aramean city then one of the most important in the Neo-Assyrian Empire. It remained an important trading center until it was destroyed by the Mongols in 1271 CE. Today there is just a village with some ruins, including an impressive medieval castle.

## Akkad, Babylon and Assyria
Around 2270 BCE, the Sumerians were conquered by the Akkadian Empire. The later empires of the region all spoke Akkadian and had their main cities north of Sumer.
Many of the cities listed were smashed by the Medes around 610 BCE as the Assyrian Empire fell.
Akkad. This city was the capital of an empire that dominated southern Mesopotamia for several centuries before 2000 BCE. Its location is not known with certainty.
32.54178144.4316441 Babylon (on the Euphrates). This ancient city, a  UNESCO World Heritage Site, is often associated with Biblical history. Babylon was the center of an empire circa 1900-1600 BCE and other empires ending with the Chaldean Empire (or Neo-Babylonian Empire) 626-539 BCE. Later it was briefly Alexander the Great's capital.      (updated Apr 2019)
35.45666743.26252 Assur (Ashur) (on the Tigris). Capital of several empires, circa 2000 BCE to 609 BCE. Both the city itself and its empire, Assyria, were named for the town's main God. Today there are only ruins, a  UNESCO World Heritage Site.
36.36666743.153 Nineveh (across the Tigris from Mosul). Nineveh was an important Assyrian city and it is mentioned in the Biblical book of Jonah; it replaced Assur as the capital in later Assyrian Empires. Around 700 BCE it was among the world's largest cities, probably the first with population over 100,000.
36.09805643.3288894 Nimrud (on the Tigris). This was an important Assyrian city circa 1350-610 BCE
Both Nimrud and Nineveh were severely damaged by the so-called Islamic State during the 2014-17 Civil War.
Arameans. These were originally a nomadic pastoral people, but many of them settled by about the 12th century BCE. Their main center was a region called Aram — mentioned in the Bible, and including most of today's Syria and parts of northern Israel — but there were also other Aramean states, mostly in what is now Turkey. The Neo-Assyrian Empire conquered the region in the 8th century BCE and relocated the Arameans all over the empire. Later the Semitic name Aram was replaced by the Greek name Syria.
Aramaic (Classical Syriac). This Semitic language was originally spoken by Arameans, but later became the lingua franca of the region, used in administration by the Neo-Babylonian Empire (612–539 BCE) and the Achaemenid (Persian) Empire (539–330 BCE). It remained important under later Greek and Roman rule, and was likely Jesus' native language. Aramaic and its descendant Syriac have been spoken for over 3,000 years, but today other languages dominate in the region and Syriac is considered endangered. It mainly survives today as a liturgical language in the Syriac churches.
35.46666744.45 Kirkuk (Arrapha). This city was part of the Akkadian and Assyrian empires, and for a few centuries around 1500 BCE, it was the capital of a Mittani Empire. It still exists today; tourists attractions include Kirkuk Citadel from 858 BC. Inside that is one of several sites that claim to be the tomb of the Prophet Daniel.
35.30249444.2476226 Nuzi (Gasur) (modern Yorghan Tepe). Founded during the Akkadian Empire, later part of the Mittani Empire.
37.31305640.7357 Mardin (near the Tigris). This city was part of the Akkadian and Assyrian empires, and later a center of Assyrian or Syriac culture, and of the Syriac Church. Today it is in Turkey, but many of its people are Assyrians, and the Syriac language, descended from Aramaic, is still spoken. It is an extremely scenic town with many fine old stone buildings.
37.73055641.4161118 Hasankeyf. An old town on the Tigris, probably founded in Assyrian times. Its main tourist attractions are cliff dwellings built in caves starting about 1000 BCE and various later buildings including churches, mosques and a castle. Much of it has now been flooded by a dam project.

## Later cities
The Assyrian Empire fell in about 610 BCE, with the Medes and the Mittani picking up many of the pieces. Then the region was taken by Persia around 539 BCE, and Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire, including this area, around 330 BCE. Some cities in Mesopotamia were built after those events.
33.09444444.5222221 Seleucia (Seleucia on the Tigris) (near today's Baghdad). Founded around 305 BCE by Alexander's general Seleucus Nicator as the first capital of his Seleucid Empire; later the capital was moved to Antioch.
33.09361144.5808332 Ctesiphon (near Seleucia). Built by the Parthians about 120 BCE, it absorbed Seleucia. Capital of both the Parthian and Sassanian Empires at different times. Abandoned about 800 CE.

## See also
Pre-Islamic Arabia
War zones
Fertile Crescent



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
NIPPUR
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:33:55


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 5,055
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nippur
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nippur (Sumerian: Nibru, often logographically recorded as 𒂗𒆤𒆠, EN.LÍLKI, "Enlil City;" Akkadian: Nibbur) was an ancient Sumerian city. It was the special seat of the worship of the Sumerian god Enlil, the "Lord Wind", ruler of the  cosmos, subject to An alone. Nippur was located in modern Nuffar 8 kilometers north of modern Afak, Al-Qādisiyyah Governorate, Iraq. It is roughly 200 km south of modern Baghdad and about 100 km southeast of the ancient city of Babylon. Occupation at the site extended back to the Ubaid period (Ubaid 2 – Hajji Muhammed), the Uruk period, and the Jemdet Nasr period. The origin of the ancient name is unknown but different proposals have been made.

History
Early Bronze Age
Early Dynastic period
Nippur never enjoyed political hegemony in its own right, but its control was crucial, as it was considered capable of conferring the overall "kingship" on monarchs from other city-states. It was distinctively a sacred city, important from the possession of the famous Ekur temple of Enlil. Ninurta, son of Enlil, also had his main cult center, the E-shumesha temple, in the city-state.
According to the Tummal Chronicle, Enmebaragesi, an early ruler of Kish, was the first to build up
this temple.
His influence over Nippur has also been detected archaeologically. The Chronicle lists successive early Sumerian rulers who kept up intermittent ceremonies at the temple: Aga of Kish, son of Enmebaragesi; Mesannepada of Ur; his son Meskiang-nunna; Gilgamesh of Uruk; his son Ur-Nungal; Nanni of Ur and his son Meskiang-nanna. It also indicates that the practice was revived in the Ur III period by Ur-Nammu of Ur, and continued until Ibbi-Sin appointed Enmegalana high priest in Uruk (c. 1950 BC).

Inscriptions of Lugal-Zage-Si and Lugal-kigub-nidudu, kings of Uruk and Ur respectively, and of other early rulers, on door-sockets and stone vases, show the veneration in which the ancient shrine was then held, and the importance attached to its possession, as giving a certain stamp of legitimacy. On their votive offerings, some of these rulers designate themselves as ensis, or governors.

Akkadian period (c. 2350-2150 BCE)
Late in the 3rd millennium BC, Nippur was conquered and occupied by the rulers of Akkad, or Agade, and numerous votive objects of Sargon, Rimush, and Naram-Sin testify to the veneration in which they also held this sanctuary. Naram-Sin rebuilt both the Ekur temple and the 17.5 meter wide city walls. One of the few instances of Nippur being recorded as having its own ruler comes from a tablet depicting a revolt of several Mesopotamian cities against Naram-Sin, including Nippur under Amar-enlila. The tablet goes on to relate that Naram-Sin defeated these rebel cities in nine battles, and brought them back under his control. The Weidner tablet (ABC 19) suggests that the Akkadian Empire fell as divine retribution, because of Sargon's initiating the transfer of "holy city" status from Nippur to Babylon.
This Akkadian occupation was succeeded by occupation during the third dynasty of Ur, and the constructions of Ur-Nammu, the great builder of temples, are superimposed immediately upon those of Naram-Sin. Ur-Nammu gave the temple its final characteristic form. Partly razing the constructions of his predecessors, he erected a terrace of bricks, some 12 m high, covering a space of about 32,000 m2. Near the northwestern edge, towards the western corner, he built a ziggurat of three stages of dry brick, faced with kiln-fired bricks laid in bitumen. On the summit stood, as at Ur and Eridu, a small chamber, the special shrine or abode of the god. Access to the stages of the ziggurat, from the court beneath, was by an inclined plane on the south-east side. To the north-east of the ziggurat stood, apparently, the House of Bel, and in the courts below the ziggurat stood various other buildings, shrines, treasure chambers, and the like. The whole structure was oriented with the corners toward the cardinal points of the compass.

Ur III period (c. 2112-2004 BC)
Ur-Nammu also rebuilt the walls of the city on the line of Naram-Sin's walls. The restoration of the general features of the temple of this, and the immediately succeeding periods, has been greatly facilitated by the discovery of a sketch map on a fragment of a clay tablet. This sketch map represents a quarter of the city to the east of the Shatt-en-Nil canal. This quarter was enclosed within its own walls, a city within a city, forming an irregular square, with sides roughly 820 m long, separated from the other quarters, and from the country to the north and east, by canals on all sides, with broad quays along the walls. A smaller canal divided this quarter of the city itself into two parts. In the south-eastern part, in the middle of its southeast side, stood the temple, while in the northwest part, along the Shatt-en-Nil, two great storehouses are indicated. The temple proper, according to this plan, consisted of an outer and inner court, each covering approximately 8 acres (32,000 m2), surrounded by double walls, with a ziggurat on the north-western edge of the latter.
Ur III ruler Shu-Sin, after destroying Šimānum, as noted in a year name, settled the prisoners of that war near Nippur he founded called Šimānum (sometimes called E-Šu-Suen). This practice for disposition of prisoners continued into the first millennium.

Middle Bronze Age
Isin/Larsa period (c. 2020-1820 BC)
The temple continued to be built upon or rebuilt by kings of various succeeding dynasties, as shown by bricks and votive objects bearing the inscriptions of the kings of various dynasties of Ur and Isin. It seems to have suffered severely in some manner at or about the time the Elamites invaded, as shown by broken fragments of statuary, votive vases, and the like, from that period. Rim-Sin I, the king of Larsa, styles himself "shepherd of the land of Nippur".

Old Babylonian period (1820-1587 BCE)
With the establishment of the Babylonian empire, under Hammurabi (r. 1792-1750 BC), early in the 2nd millennium BC, the religious, as well as the political center of influence, was transferred to Babylon, Marduk became lord of the pantheon, many of Enlil's attributes were transferred to him, and Ekur, Enlil's temple, was to some extent neglected.
The city was taken by Ilī-ma-ilu, the first ruler of the First Sealand dynasty in about the 29th year of the reign of Samsu-iluna, ruler of Babylon. It was retaken by Abī-ešuḫ by his 5th year, after he damned the Tigris river.

Late Bronze Age
The Late Bronze Age was from around 1600/1550 to 1200/1150 BCE. In 1587 BCE, the Fall of the Old Babylonian Kingdom came after Mursili I of Hatti raided Babylon in an event known as the "Sack of Babylon".

Kassite period
Under the succeeding Kassite dynasty, shortly after the middle of the 2nd millennium, Ekur was restored once more to its former splendor, several monarchs of that dynasty built upon and adorned it, and thousands of inscriptions, dating from the time of those rulers, have been discovered in its archives. A new temple within Ekur, the Ekurigibarra, was built by Kurigalzu I (c. 1375 BC).

Iron Age onwards
After the middle of the 12th century BC follows another long period of comparative neglect due to the river Euphrates changing its course, but with the waters return and the conquest of Babylonia by the Assyrian king Sargon II, at the close of the 8th century BC, we meet again with building inscriptions, and under Ashurbanipal, about the middle of the 7th century BC, we find Ekur restored with a splendour greater than ever before, the ziggurat of that period being 58 by 39 m. After the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire Ekur appears to have gradually fallen into decay, until finally, in the Seleucid period, the ancient temple was turned into a fortress (Ancient Greek: Νιππούρ, Nippoúr). Huge walls were erected at the edges of the ancient terrace, the courts of the temple were filled with houses and streets, and the ziggurat itself was curiously built over in a cruciform shape, and converted into an acropolis for the fortress. This fortress was occupied and further built upon until the close of the Parthian period, about 250 AD; but under the succeeding rule of the Sassanids it in its turn fell into decay.

Islamic abandonment
Nippur remained inhabited in Islamic times, and is mentioned by early Muslim geographers under the name of Niffar. It lay on the Nahr an-Nars canal, believed to have been built by Narses. By the late 800s, though, geographers no longer mentioned it, which indicates that the city had gone into decline by that time. This was part of a broader decline in settlements throughout Iraq, especially in the south, as decaying infrastructure and political violence resulted in large areas being completely abandoned. However, Nippur remained the seat of an Assyrian Church of the East Christian bishopric until the late 900s, when the bishopric was transferred to the city of Nil, further northwest. Nippur itself may have remained occupied even later, since ceramics found among the ruins display underglaze sgraffiato drawings, which were not used much prior to the end of the 10th century. By the time of Yaqut al-Hamawi in the early 1200s, Nippur had been definitively abandoned, although Yaqut still recognized its ruins as the site of a famous place.
On the upper surface of these mounds was found a considerable Jewish town, dating from about the beginning of the Arabic period onward to the 10th century AD, in the houses of which were large numbers of Aramaic incantation bowls. Jewish names, appearing in the Persian documents discovered at Nippur, show, however, that Jewish settlement at that city dates in fact from a much earlier period.

Archaeology
Nippur was situated on both sides of the ancient bed of the Shatt-en-Nil canal, one of the earliest courses of the Euphrates, between the present bed of that river and the Tigris, almost 160 km southeast of Baghdad. The canal bed divides the site into an East Mound and West Mound. It is represented by the great complex of ruin mounds known to the Arabs as Nuffar, written by the earlier explorers Niffer, divided into two main parts by the dry bed of the old Shatt-en-Nil (Arakhat). The highest point of these ruins, a conical hill rising about 30 m above the level of the surrounding plain, northeast of the canal bed, is called by the Arabs Bint el-Amiror "prince's daughter". The site reached a maximum extent of 130 hectares, this occurring in the Ur III period and again in the Kassite period.
Nippur was first excavated, briefly, by Sir Austen Henry Layard in 1851. Full-scale digging was begun by an expedition from the University of Pennsylvania. The work involved four seasons of excavation between 1889 and 1900 and was led by John Punnett Peters, John Henry Haynes, and Hermann Volrath Hilprecht. Thousands of tablets were found at a smaller mound dubbed "tablet hill", about 7.5 meters in average height and 52 square meters in area, southeast of the temple mound. A true arch, one of the world's earliest examples, was also found. In the Parthian layer a box containing fragments of votive axes made of glass from the Kassite period were found. Several late Kassite rulers are represented including Kurigalzu II.
Nippur was excavated for 19 seasons between 1948 and 1990 by a team from the Oriental Institute of Chicago, joined at times by the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology and the American Schools of Oriental Research. Part of the effort involved removing large archaeological dumps from the University of Pennsylvania excavations. In the process Early Dynastic bowls, cuneiform tablets, and brick stamps were found. At the temples of Inanna and at Ekur foundation deposits were found with statues of Shulgi and Ur-Nammu. A temple of Inanna, begun in the Early Dynastic period was completely excavated. Subsequent superimposed new iterations of the temple extended all the way up to Parthian times.  Finds included a tablet dated to the 4th year of the Kassite king Shagarakti-Shuriash, one dated to the 44th year of Ur III king Shulgi, and an Indus Valley stamp seal. In 1977 they briefly excavated at the nearby site of Umm al-Hafriyat which was in the process of being heavily looted. Sargonic period tablets found there suggest the ancient name of that site was as Maškan-Ili-Akkade (maš-gánki-ni-dingir-a-ga-dèki). The excavation is now in the process of being published.
Preliminary efforts to restart work at Nippur began in 2018 under McGuire Gibson. Excavation work at Nippur began in April 2019 under Abbas Alizadeh. Initial focus at Nippur was on a major Parthian period building and a small Late Sassanian house. Permission has also been granted to dig at Dlehim and Drehem. Excavation began in November 2022 for the 21st season which lasted two months. Work began at nearby Drehem but ceased after authorities decided that a police station must first be established there to prevent looting. Work then returned to the Parthian building.

Ziggurat
Extensive excavation details have been recorded for the Ziggurat of Ur-Gur. Overall, the ziggurat site is 25 meters in height, has a rectangular base of 39 meters by 58 meters, consisting three stages of dry brick, and faced with kiln-fired bricks laid in bitumen. The northern corner of the ziggurat points to 12 degrees east of the magnetic north. Construction structure and materials are homogeneous, of small unbaked bricks, laid in different ways: first layer of bricks is on the edge sides with the flat sides out, second layer on the edge sides with the ends out, third layer on the flat sides with the edges out.
The ziggurat contains a water conduit system. From the upper surface of the ziggurat, there is a conduit for water drainage in the middle of three façades. Built by baked bricks 1 metre in breadth and 3 meters in depth, around the conduit base is a plaster of bitumen, sloping outward with gutters to carry off water.
Pavements extend from the ziggurat in a cruciform shape with square-like large bricks, in which pieces of pottery are used to fasten the clay together. They extend 2.4 meters below the ziggurat foundation and 12 meters away, connected to the lowest stage of the ziggurat, which protects the ziggurat foundation from rain.

Temple of Enlil
The Temple of Enlil situated northeast of the ziggurat was excavated. Topography of the Temple of Enlil was yielded. By stratigraphic excavation, the chronological sequence of the temple could be constructed. The temple dated to Ur III period was constructed by Urnammu, restored and rebuilt by kings ruled Nippur for centuries.
As the Temple of Enlil was rebuilt after Ur III, the architectural information provided was based on remains from the Ur III period. The rectangular temple measured about 45×21 m with one entrance on the northeast wall and one entrance on the southwest wall. Floors were paved with baked-brick square bricks with size of 37 cm. 2 substructures built beneath the paved floor with 1.3 m elevation. Walls that the thickness varied from 3.35 to 3.95 m were constructed with straw-tempered unbaked bricks and mud mortar. There was no indication for windows walls above floor level were not preserved but windows were required for additional lighting in the Temple of Enlil. The possible height of the walls was 13.2 m as it was three times of the substructure which is 4.40 m. Although no remains of the roof left, purlins and reeds were covered first and then rammed earth mixed with straw was layered.
From the floor plan of the Temple of Enlil in Ur III period, 2 cellae each connected with 2 minor chambers with wider doorways (2.40 m, 1.45 m for normal doorway) and 2 subsidiary chambers were presented. The burning evidence in the cella (room 13) and the minor chambers (room 16,17) adjacent to the other cella (room 18), the inscription of the Temple of Enlil around Ur III period; both indicated the purpose of the Temple of Enlil was to feed gods on the adjacent ziggurat, as 'kitchen temple', so food preparation could be taken place. Other than that, the Temple of Enlil shown no place of a dais for enthroned deities. Thus, the Temple of Enlil was not for worshiping. Yet, religious ritual related to divine repast perhaps libation, could serve as the purpose of Temple of Enlil during Ur III period.

Temple of Gula
In 1990 Oriental Institute excavators identified a building in area WA as the Temple of Gula, a goddess of healing and consort of Ninurta. The earliest identified construction of the temple was in the Isin-Larsa period, with major rebuilds in the Kassite, Neo-Assyrian, and Neo-Babylonian periods. It is thought that the missing temple of Ninurta is nearby.

Murashu archive
Almost directly opposite the temple, a large palace was excavated, apparently of the Seleucid period, and in this neighborhood and further southward on these mounds large numbers of inscribed tablets of various periods, including temple archives of the Kassite and commercial archives of the Achaemenid Empire, were excavated. The latter, the "books and papers" of the house of Murashu, commercial agents of the government, throw light on the condition of the city and the administration of the country in the Achaemenid period. The tablets date between 454 BC and 404 BC with the majority between 440 BC and 414 BC. The archive is reflective of a diverse populace as one-third of contracts depict non-Babylonian names. Enduring for at least three successive generations, the house of Murashu capitalized on the enterprise of renting substantial plots of farmland having been awarded to occupying Persian governors, nobility, soldiery, probably at discounted rates, whose owners were most likely satisfied with a moderate return. The business would then subdivide these into smaller plots for cultivation by indigenous farmers and recent foreign settlers for a lucrative fee. The house of Murashu leased land, subdivided it, then subleased or rented out the smaller parcels, thereby simply acting as an intermediary. It thereby profited both from the collected rents and percentage of amassed credit reflective of that year's future crop harvests after supplying needed farming implements, means of irrigation, and paying taxes. In 423/422 BC, the house of Murashu took in "about 20,000 kg or 20,000 shekels of silver". "The activities of the house of Murashu had a ruinous effect upon the economy of the country and thus led to the bankruptcy of the landowners. Although the house of Murashu loaned money to the landowners initially, after a few decades it began more and more to take the landowners' place, and the land began to concentrate in its hands."

Site TA
Site TA is a 20 m × 40 m area located in Tablet Hill in Nippur. It is built in between 1948 and 1952 and was partially abandoned due to economic crisis in 1739 B.C. and fully vacated in 1720 B.C. It served as a small community with residential buildings and some minor public infrastructures at that time. TA is full of small size, irregular buildings which create a community as a whole. Houses found in TA are generally one-storey which is a common feature at that period of time. Only three of the houses have a stair to the upper level but it is not considered a two-storey but rooftop level.
There are total of 1.591 tablets found in site TA. Regarding the texts type found in tablets are divided into two main categories, private documents and educational material, TA is viewed as a residential area. Most of the houses in TA are residential housing while only one of the houses (House F) are viewed as scribal school, this conclusion is made due to the significant amount of 1,407 tablets are found in House F. Moreover, organic materials were found in some of the houses, therefore, there might be animal husbandry. Moreover, due to the contents of tablets, it is believed that TA is owned by small private owner.

Inanna Temple
Inanna (Inanna of Duranki) temple is a historical hallmark of Mesopotamia. Though the temple was a religious element in the dynasty of Ur, there were a lot of political and social issues associated with the temple. The excavations that led to the discovery of the remains of the temple of Nippur were conducted by Donald McCown in 1952. The temple was then excavated between 1954 and 1958, reaching the Early Dynastic II period level. In 1960-1961 the Early Dynastic I (with a large building on same plan) and then Jemdat Nasr and Uruk Period (private houses) levels were reached. Finds included a macehead of Naram-Sin, ruler of the Akkadian Empire, indicating he had rebuilt the temple. During the excavation, the team inadvertently experienced difficulty progressing with their work. The excavators reached a surface that appeared like a baked brick pavement. Notably, this incident drew a lot of interest in the team, and with further progress, they reached what seemed to be a room. Further into their excavation, they discovered a room with inscriptions, suggesting that the building was a temple built by Sulgi, the second king of the third dynasty of Ur. However, the architectural plan of the temple is further demonstrated by the layers of the building.   During the excavation, it was noted that the building had twenty-three-level layers. The excavators revealed that each of the twenty-three layers serves a different purpose. For instance, levels VIII-VII were associated with sculptures and idols used in the temple's religious activities. On the temple's exterior, the excavators found that it was characterised by niches that supported the religious activities at the temple. The niches had special tablets inscipted with literature regarding the teachings at the temple. The Inanna temple had significant political influence in the Ur dynasty. It was built, supported by Sulgi and many subsequent kings, using it as a pedestal to manage the leadership of the dynasty. The temple had specific administrative units that were answerable to the reigning king of the dynasty. This could be attributed to the fact that the leading goddess of the temple, Inanna, was associated with power. Kings believed that the Inanna goddess has the power to influence political issues, which explained the temple's importance and long-lasting popularity throughout the dynasties.

Nearby sites
Drehem
Drehem or ancient Puzrish-Dagan, sometimes called a suburb of Nippur, is the best-known city of the so-called redistribution centers of the Ur III period. It is located some ten kilometers south of Nippur. Witnessed by thousands of cuneiform tablets, livestock (cattle, sheep, and goats) of the state was centralized at Drehem and redistributed to the temples, its officials and the royal palaces of Sumer. The temples of nearby Nippur were the main destinations of the livestock. The city was founded by Shulgi, king of Ur. Some of its cuneiform archives are at the Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto.

Tell Dlehim
The nearby site of Dlehim (Dulaihim, Delehem, Dlehem, Dlihim) is about 40 hectares in area, separated in eastern and western sections by an ancient 50 meter wide canal bed, and currently described as being 2.5 meters in height. It lies about 21 kilometers south of Nippur and about ten kilometers south of Drehem. The site was visited by John Punnett Peters in 1889 and (believing it was Drehem) by Edgar James Banks in 1903. It was first examined (along with Drehem) in 1925 by Raymond P. Dougherty on behalf of the American Schools of Oriental Research. The mound at the time rose to 25 feet above the plain and was fairly unremarkable with some baked bricks and flint saw-blades. In the 1970s the site was examined as part of an Oriental Institute regional survey. The site was described as being 700 meters by 630 meters and rising
to a height of 18 meters in the west-southwest and that "poor drainage and high soil salinity make collecting conditions generally poor". Pottery shards showed that primary ocupation was in the Early Uruk and Jemdet Nasr periods with
occupation continuing in the Akkadian Empire, Ur III and Isin-Larsa periods.
In modern times it was surveyed by H. Fujii of the Kokushikan University of Tokyo in 1988. In the early days of archaeology it was often confused with the nearby Drehem. It covers an area of 36 hectares and was occupied in the Ur III period. The site has been suggested as the location of ancient Tummal (thought to be the source of the Tummal Inscription). Tummal played a primary political role in the Ur III period. In 2016 the QADIS survey project, carried out an aerial and surface survey of the site. Four bricks (three re-used for a later drain and one in a temple area) of Ur III ruler Amar-Sin were found at the site. Extended traces of Ur III period buildings including an oval temple with central terrace were detected by drone flights and surface surveys. The presence of modern military berms were also noted. The Qadis survey, through imagery and sounding, determined that the site had a 150 meter by 80 meter harbor. In 2019 the Oriental Institute of Chicago received permission to excavate at Dlehim and in 2022 preliminary excavation began.

Tell Waresh 2
The site of Tell Waresh 2 (first called Tell Hindi2 because it is located about 1 kilometer north-west of Tell Hindi, later named after Tūlūl Werrish which lies 3 kilometers to the southwest) lies 12 kilometers northeast of Nippur (UTM 38 S 532261.73 m E, 3561401.12 m N) and was subject to a rescue excavation in 1990 led by Muhammad Yahya Radhi on behalf of the Iraqi State Board of Antiquities and Heritage. It was one of a number of rescue excavation in response to the digging of the Main Drain Canal project. The site showed outlines of buildings and many artifacts on the surface. Remains were of the Isin-Larsa period and included terracotta plaques, figurines, clay sealings, cylinder seals, and a number of cuneiform tablets, mainly legal documents. The most prominent of the latter were 29 tablets found in a clay jar which contained year names of four rulers of Larsa, Abi-Sare, Sumu-el, Nur-Adad, and Sin-Iddinam (1785 BC to 1778 BC). The same team revisted the site in 2019 as part of larger survey in the area, obtaining georeferenced data. A final report is now in progress.

See also
Cities of the ancient Near East
Chronology of the ancient Near East
Garden of the gods (Sumerian paradise)
Lu-diĝira
Dūr-Abī-ešuḫ

Notes
References
This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Nippur". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Chiera, Edward, "Legal and administrative documents from Nippur: chiefly from the dynasties of Isin and Larsa. No. 1-2", University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, 1914
[33] Edward Chiera, "Cuneiform Series, Volume I: Sumerian Lexical Texts from the Temple School of Nippur", Oriental Institute Publication 11, 1929
Tim Clayden, Bernhard Schneider, "Assurbanipal and the Ziggurat at Nippur" KASKAL 12, pp. 348–382, 2015
V.E. Crawford, "Nippur the Holy City", Archaeology, vol. 12, pp. 74–83, 1959
T. Fish, "The Summerian City Nippur in the Period of the Third Dynasty of Ur", Iraq, vol. 5, pp. 157–179, 1938
[34] Fisher, C. S., "Mycenaean Palace at Nippur", American Joumal of Archaeology, vol. 8, pp. 403–32, 1904
[35]Legrain, Leon, "Terra-cottas from Nippur", University of Pennsylvania Press, 1930
[36] McGuire Gibson, Richard L. Zettler, and James A. Armstrong, "The Southern Corner of Nippur: Summary of Excavations During the 14th and 15th Seasons," Sumer, vol. 39, pp. 170–190, 1983
[37] McGuire Gibson, "Patterns of occupation at Nippur", Oriental Institute, U. of Chicago, 1992
McGuire Gibson, "A Re-Evaluation of the Akkad Period in the Diyala Region on the Basis of Recent Excavations at Nippur and in the Hamrin", American Journal of Archaeology, vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 531–538, 1982
D.P. Hanson and G.f. Dales, "The Temple of Inanna Queen of Heaven at Nippur", Archaeology, vol. 15, pp. 75–84, 1962
[38]Hilprecht, Hermann V., "Old Babylonian Inscriptions Chiefly from Nippur: 1", Vol. 1, MacCalla, 1893
[39]Hilprecht, Hermann Vollrat, "Old Babylonian Inscriptions, Chiefly from Nippur: II", Vol. 1, University of Pennsylvania, Department of Archaeology and Palaeontology, 1896
[40]Langdon, Stephen, "Historical and religious texts from the temple library of Nippur. Vol 31", R. Merkel, 1914
Donald E. McCown, "Excavations at Nippur, 1948–50", Journal of Near Eastern Studies, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 169–176, 1952
Neumann, Hans, "Nippur–‘Heiliger Ort’ der Sumerer", in: Reinhard Achenbach / Nikola Moustakis (eds.), Heilige Orte der Antike – Gesammelte Studien im Anschluss an eine Ringvorlesung des Exzellenzclusters “Religion und Politik in den Kulturen der Vormoderne und der Moderne” an der Universität Münster im Wintersemester 2013/2014(Kasion 1), Münster, pp. 37–66, 2018
A. L. Oppenheim, "Siege Documents from Nippur", Iraq, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 69–89, 1955
[41] Hugo Radau, "Letters to Cassite kings from the Temple archives of Nippur", The Babylonian expedition of the University of Pennsylvania. Series A: Cuneiform texts., vol. 17, pt. 1, 1908
Sallaberger, W., "The Cupbearer and the Cult-Priest in the Temple: External and Internal Cultic Practitioners in Early Bronze Age Mesopotamia", Journal of ancient near eastern religions, 19(1-2), pp. 90–111, 2019
Marcel Sigrist, "Drehem", CDL Press, 1993, ISBN 0-9620013-6-8
[42] Elizabeth C. Stone and Paul E. Zimansky, "Old Babylonian Contracts From Nippur: Selected Texts From the University Museum University of Pennsylvania, Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago Microfiche Archives", Volume 1 Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976
[43]Swindler, Daris Ray. "A study of the cranial and skeletal material excavated at Nippur", Philadelphia : University Museum, University of Pennsylvania, 1956
Zettler, Richard L., "The Ur III Temple of Inanna at Nippur: The Operation and Organization of Urban Religious Institutions in Mesopotamia in the Late Third Millennium B.C.", Berliner Beitraege zum vorderen Orient 11. Berlin: Dietrich Reimer, 1992

External links

Link to letters from the archeologist
Nippur Digitized - Record of 1889-1900 excavation
The story the bowls tell - Penn Today - Michele W. Berger - September 6, 2022
Nippur - Museum Bulletin of the Penn Museum, Volume X / Number 3-4 1944
The Nippur Expedition: the holy city of Nippur - Oriental Institute of Chicago
Nippur Archaeological Site Photographs at Oriental Institute Archived 2013-11-09 at the Wayback Machine
Drehem cuneiform tablets at Milliken University
85/452 Tablet, cuneiform receipt for livestock, terracotta, Drehem, 2041 BCE
Video - Affluent Suburbs or Disenfranchised Banlieue: The Urban Edge at Nippur, Iraq - Augusta McMahon ISAC - May 5 2023


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 15,761
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nippur
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nippur (en sumérien NIBRU, en akkadien Nippur ou Nibbur, en arabe Niffar ou Nuffar) est une ville de la Mésopotamie antique (Irak actuel). C'est le lieu de culte principal du grand dieu sumérien Enlil, considéré comme le seigneur du cosmos, donc un des principaux centres religieux du pays de Sumer et d'Akkad dans la Haute Antiquité. Dans l'écriture cunéiforme sumérienne, les mêmes signes peuvent se lire NIBRU et EN.LÍL. Ce site a été peuplé au moins à partir du Ve millénaire, et jusqu'au début du IIe millénaire de notre ère.
Nippur était située de part et d'autre du Shatt en-Nil, un des anciens bras de l'Euphrate, entre le lit actuel de cette rivière et le Tigre, à environ 160 km au sud-est de Bagdad. Le site archéologique est divisé en deux parties principales par le cours asséché du Shatt en-Nil. Le point culminant des ruines, une colline conique au nord-est du canal, s'élevant à une trentaine de mètres au-dessus de la plaine environnante, est appelée de nos jours Bint el-Amiror (« fille du prince »). Il correspond à l'ancienne zone des temples, comprenant notamment les sanctuaires d'Enlil et de la déesse Inanna/Ishtar, qui ont été mis au jour lors des fouilles.
De par la longévité des fouilles archéologiques qui y ont été conduites depuis la fin du XIXe siècle et jusqu'en 1990, qui ont mis au jour différents édifices étalés sur toute la période d'occupation du site, mais en priorité sur les phases antérieures au Ier millénaire av. J.-C., et ont exhumé des milliers de tablettes cunéiformes, d’une très grande variété documentaire pour une période couvrant toute l’histoire de la Mésopotamie, le site de Nippur est l'un des mieux connus de tous ceux d'Irak.

Fouilles
Le site archéologique de Nuffar est repéré par certains des principaux redécouvreurs britanniques des anciens sites mésopotamiens au XIXe siècle : Henry Rawlinson, Austen Henry Layard et William Kennett Loftus. 
Les premiers travaux de fouilles sur le site sont entrepris par une équipe d'archéologues de l'Université de Pennsylvanie en 1888, la « Babylonian Expedition », financée par un fonds collecté pour l'occasion auprès de donateurs. Nippur est d'ailleurs le premier site mésopotamien fouillé par des archéologues venus des États-Unis, et c'est resté le principal site de la région exploré par des spécialistes de ce pays. Les premières campagnes sont dirigées par John P. Peters, John Henry Haynes et Hermann Hilprecht, et durent jusqu'en 1900. Ces fouilles se concentrent d'abord sur la zone sacrée du tell oriental, puis sur Tablet Hill, au sud du même tell, ainsi qu'au sud-ouest du tell ouest. Elles sont marquées par l'animosité entre Peters et Hilprecht, qui débouchent à leur retour en Amérique sur une controverse envenimée, le premier reprochant au second de s'arroger le mérite des principales découvertes et l'accusant d'avoir falsifié ses rapports en présentant comme des découvertes lors de fouilles des trouvailles qui étaient en fait des achats, controverse qui causa la fin de la carrière universitaire de son rival en 1911. Ces campagnes sont avant tout l'occasion de faire une véritable moisson de tablettes (plus de 30 000), les méthodes de fouilles des bâtiments étant alors peu élaborées et les rapports de fouilles difficilement exploitables. La publication des découvertes est organisée dans la série des Babylonian Expedition (BE) et dans celle des Publications of the Babylonian Section (PBS), et les trouvailles de cette période sont réparties entre l'Université de Pennsylvanie, le Musée impérial de Constantinople (aujourd'hui le Musée archéologique d'Istanbul), une autre partie, conservée par Hilprecht, étant léguée à sa mort à l'Université d'Iéna.
Après une interruption de près d'un demi-siècle, les fouilles reprennent en 1948 sous la direction de Donald E. McCown (en 1948 et 1951-52) et Richard C. Haines (en 1949-50 et de 1953 à 1962) , dirigeant une équipe de fouilleurs de l'Université de Chicago associée à l'Institut oriental de Chicago ainsi que l'Université de Pennsylvanie (la « Joint Expedition »). Les fouilles se concentrent à nouveau sur Tablet Hill et la zone des temples, dégageant notamment le temple d'Inanna et le Temple Nord. Après 1962 la direction des fouilles incombe à l'Université de Chicago seule avec James E. Knudstad (campagnes en 1964-65 et 1966-67), qui entreprend d'explorer la forteresse d'époque parthe et dresse un plan du site.
Les fouilles de Nippur sont interrompues de 1967 à 1972, puis recommencent avec une équipe de Chicago dirigée par McGuire Gibson. Les campagnes se sont ensuite poursuivies jusqu'à la guerre du Golfe, en 1990. Elles se sont d'abord focalisées sur le tell ouest (zones WA, WB et WC, TC, EA, EB, EC, puis le tell M), puis un peu sur tout le site, et pour différentes périodes. Des tranchées ont permis de faire des relevés archéologiques pour toutes les périodes d'occupation du site, et ont fourni de précieuses informations pour la périodisation de l'histoire mésopotamienne. Pendant les années durant lesquelles le site était inaccessible pour des fouilles, l'équipe de Chicago se consacre à l'exploitation des nombreuses données collectées, publiées notamment dans les éditions de l'Institut Oriental (publications en cours). Les fouilles des équipes de Chicago ont repris en 2019 sous la direction d'A. Alizadeh.

Plan de la ville et développement urbain
La compréhension de l'organisation du site de Nippur repose sur les données topographiques constatées lors des fouilles, ainsi que de l'appui fourni par le plan de la ville d'époque kassite, certes fragmentaire, mais représentant une partie appréciable de l'ancienne ville et relativement fiable pour en comprendre son organisation générale, car il sélectionne les informations essentielles (muraille, canal, temples, jardins). Cependant il n'est pas forcément fiable pour les époques antérieures. Le site de Nippur est situé à proximité de l'ancien cours de l'Euphrate, qui coulait à l'ouest, et constitués de deux tells principaux séparés par un canal ou un bras de l'Euphrate, aujourd'hui à sec, le Shatt en-Nil, qui a un cours d'orientation nord-ouest/sud-est. Le plan de la ville d'époque kassite indique qu'un troisième coulait au nord de la ville à cette période. La ville était enceinte par une muraille, qui a été dégagée sur plusieurs secteurs (WC, EA, EB, EC), reflétant les évolutions de l'espace occupé par la ville : si un mur avait été érigé dès l'époque des dynasties archaïques au nord du secteur des temples, ce n'est qu'à partir de la période d'Ur III, qu'on en trouve un dans la partie sud-ouest (zone WC), où il est ensuite reconstruit à l'époque kassite. Les murailles devaient englober dans cette configuration une surface d'environ 135 hectares. Le tell ouest, qui s'élève une vingtaine de mètres au-dessus de la plaine et est le plus massif, comprend les zones de fouilles appelées par les archéologues avec des sigles débutant par la lettre W (WA, WB, WC, etc.). La partie orientale, qui s'élève d'une douzaine de mètres par rapport à la plaine est divisée elle-même en deux tells : la zone des temples principaux dans la partie centre-nord, qui est constamment le centre cultuel de la ville, les temples étant généralement reconstruits suivant un plan similaire à partir de la fin du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C., et au sud la « colline des tablettes » (Tablet Hill, ou encore Scribal Quarter, le « quartier des scribes »), nommée ainsi du fait du grand nombre de tablettes exhumées sur place (sigles débutant par T : TA, TB et TC), qui est un quartier résidentiel ; entre les deux se trouve une petite dépression qui était peut-être traversée par un canal à l'origine, mais il n'apparaît pas sur le plan d'époque kassite. La ville a connu plusieurs phases de réorganisation, notamment en raison de son abandon partiel ou total à deux reprises, entre la période paléo-babylonienne et la période kassite v. 1700-1500 av. J.-C., suivie par un vaste programme de reconstruction et sans doute de réorganisation du site, qui prend alors assurément l'aspect présenté sur le plan d'époque kassite (confirmé en général par les fouilles sur place), puis un nouvel abandon survient entre la période post-kassite et la période néo-babylonienne, v. 1000-800 av. J.-C. Le cours de l'Euphrate dérive alors plus à l'ouest. Cette histoire complexe explique pourquoi on ne peut repérer de principe général d'organisation de sa morphologie urbaine. La période parthe voit des réaménagements se produire dans la zone principale de la cité, et notamment la ziggurat est remplacée par un grand palais. Nippur est encore une grande cité pendant la période sassanide. La partie occidentale de la cité devient progressivement la zone principale de l'habitat. Le recul de l'occupation débute sous la dynastie abbasside, à la fin de laquelle la cité est en grande partie abandonnée.

Nippur au IIIe millénaire av. J.-C.
La plus ancienne phase d'occupation attestée sur le site de Nippur remonte à la période d'Obeïd. C'est sans doute déjà une ville importante au IVe millénaire av. J.-C. (périodes d'Uruk et de Djemdet Nasr), époque uniquement approchée par des sondages sur le site, et pour laquelle une estimation de la surface occupée est impossible. Son symbole pourrait apparaître aux côtés des autres villes majeures du Sud mésopotamien dans les « listes de villes » de Djemdet Nasr, qui témoignent d'une forme d'alliance entre ces cités. 
Le IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. est mieux connu. Nippur apparaît comme un centre religieux majeur de la Mésopotamie du Sud, devenant en quelque sorte sa capitale religieuse, avec la primauté du dieu Enlil. Celle-ci semble s'affirmer durant la période des dynasties archaïques (v. 2900-2350 av. J.-C.), dans des conditions difficiles à déterminer car la documentation sur ce point fait largement défaut. Ce poids religieux est renforcé par l'importance de l'autre grande divinité locale, Ninurta, ainsi que par d'autres temples majeurs, dont celui de la déesse Inanna. Sans jamais être une capitale politique importante, Nippur est donc une cité de première importance, ce qui explique qu'elle ait bénéficié de l'attention des souverains dominant le Sud mésopotamien, notamment ceux des deux premiers « Empires », l'empire d'Akkad (v. 2340-2190 av. J.-C.) et celui de la troisième dynastie d'Ur (Ur III, v. 2112-2004 av. J.-C.).

Dynasties archaïques
Nippur n'a jamais eu de dynastie royale importante à la période historique, et dès les périodes archaïques son statut est lié à celui de son grand dieu, Enlil. On ne sait pas grand chose de sa situation politique avant les conquêtes du roi Sargon d'Akkad (c. 2340). Quelques inscriptions laissées sur des objets votifs par des personnes ayant dirigé cette ville, portant le titre d'ensí qui est alors souvent utilisé pour désigner des rois de « cités-États » sumériennes, mais n'apportent aucune information sur leur situation politique. La ville est peut-être dans l'orbite de Kish, qui est la plus puissante cité-État située dans son voisinage. Quoi qu'il en soit elle apparaît dans le cadre des ligues de cités qui ont alors existé à cette période, puisqu'elle fait partie de l'« hexapole » apparaissant dans les textes de Shuruppak datés du XXVIe siècle av. J.-C., groupement de cités qui semble se faire sous l'égide de Kish. Nippur a probablement joué un rôle important dans ce type de regroupement politique, puisqu'elle semble avoir été le siège de leurs assemblées, dont son dieu Enlil était symboliquement le chef. C'est peut-être lors de ce type de réunions qu'ont été offerts dans le temple d'Enlil des vases en pierre inscrits datés du règne de Lugal-zagesi, maître du Sud mésopotamien à la toute fin de la période. Le statut de Nippur est donc dès ces époques très dépendant du prestige de son dieu Enlil, qui occupe une place majeure dans le panthéon de Mésopotamie méridionale au moins à partir des alentours de 2600, et qui en devient le dieu principal par la suite, en tout cas pour les souverains qui lui reconnaissent le statut de dieu pourvoyeur de la royauté (c'est le cas d'En-metena de Lagash vers 2400). La domination de Nippur et la possibilité de restaurer le grand temple d'Enlil ou d'y faire des offrandes, ou même de s'y faire couronner, devient alors un enjeu politique majeur. Nippur a par ailleurs la particularité d'être localisée à la charnière entre la région où les Sumériens sont dominants, au sud, et celle où les Sémites (Akkadiens) sont majoritaires, au nord, même si sa population semble être majoritairement sumérienne. C'est peut-être ce qui explique la présence d'un grand lieu de culte à cet endroit.
Peu de bâtiments de cette période sont connus, en dehors de quelques secteurs de sondage (peut-être TB, WF, mais sur de très petits espaces), et surtout du temple d'Inanna (niveaux IX à VII, voir plus bas). L'analyse du matériel céramique de ce dernier a permis de mieux connaître les évolutions ayant lieu durant le IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. en Basse Mésopotamie, notamment de constater les divergences entre la séquence du dynastique archaïque de Nippur avec la périodisation « canonique » de la période établie à partir de sites de la Diyala, tandis que la transition entre la période des dynasties archaïques et celle d'Akkad a été plus particulièrement étudiée dans le sondage WF durant les dernières campagnes de fouilles (1989-1990).

Empire d'Akkad
Vers 2340, Nippur est soumise en même temps que le reste du pays de Sumer par Sargon, fondateur de l'Akkad (2340-2190), qui conduit sa principale victime, le roi Lugal-zagesi, aux portes du temple d'Enlil en guise de triomphe et de reconnaissance de sa suprématie par le grand dieu. Les rois d'Akkad confirment donc le statut de ville sainte de Nippur, dont la province est confiée à des gouverneurs (ensí), qui coexistent avec les administrateurs de l'Ekur (sanga) qui jouissent d'une grande importance. Cela n'empêche pas la ville de participer à deux révoltes contre le roi Naram-Sîn. Ce dernier place par ailleurs une de ses filles en tant que grande prêtresse d'Enlil, et entreprend la reconstruction de l'Ekur. La population de la ville semble rester majoritairement sumérienne, malgré l'arrivée probable d'Akkadiens, notamment parmi le personnel administratif mis en place par les rois d'Akkad.
La transition entre la période des dynasties archaïques et celle-ci est documentée à Nippur par des archives d'environ 150 textes provenant d'un organisme lié au pouvoir royal, relatives à l'exploitation de terres céréalières relevant du domaine de cet organisme (celles appelées šuku servant pour l'entretien du personnel, celles appelées uru4-lá concédées contre une redevance en nature, correspondant apparemment à la moitié de la récolte), exploitées par des équipes de travailleurs dépendants (engar) rémunérés en rations d'entretien (surtout en grain, huile, aussi en pain et bière), le stockage et la redistribution de différents types de produits (grains et autres denrées, métaux, étoffes, objets divers). 
D'autres lots tablettes datant des règnes de Naram-Sîn et Shar-kali-sharri ont été retrouvées dans l'Ekur, où elles avaient été réutilisées pour servir de remblai entre la ziggurat et l'enceinte du complexe religieux. Une partie nous renseigne sur la reconstruction du temple par ce roi : mobilisation d'artisans venant de tout l'empire, entretenus aux frais du temple, et mise au point de nombreux objets en métaux précieux. L'entreprise est confiée à des dignitaires de la cour royale (šabra, šagin) et à l'administrateur du temple (sanga). L'Ekur exerçait une fonction sociale en assurant l'entretien de personnes démunies (veuves, orphelins), en échange d'un travail. Un autre lot concerne l'administration du temple de Ninurta, qui est quant à lui rattaché au domaine royal. Le troisième lot de textes distingué pour cette période (quoi que le fait qu'ils proviennent tous d'un même lieu de trouvaille n'est pas assuré) est l'« archive de l'oignon », ensemble de documents de gestion provenant d'un grand domaine non identifié, ayant trait comme son nom l'indique à la culture et la redistribution d'oignons et autres légumes et condiments. Enfin, un autre ensemble de textes est de nature privée et légale, provenant essentiellement de la famille d'un notable nommé Enlile-maba.
Du point de vue archéologique les découvertes concernant la période sont limitées aux secteurs du temple d'Inanna (peut-être les niveaux VI et V, très dégradés au moment des fouilles donc très mal connus), et de la zone de fouilles TB (niveaux XII à X) où ont été dégagées sur un petit espace plusieurs strates de bâtiments attribués à cette période. Mais il reste difficile d'obtenir une chronologie absolue fiable pour ces niveaux, parce que l'évolution dans les types de céramiques entre la fin du dynastique archaïque, la période d'Akkad et celle d'Ur III sont mal connues, et que la culture matérielle ne connaît pas forcément de changements notables entre ces phases définies à partir d'évolutions politiques. Les fouilles de sondage réalisées dans le secteur WF en 1989 et 1990 ont tenté de mieux identifier ces évolutions (niveaux XIX à VI, une partie de bâtiment).

Troisième dynastie d'Ur
Durant la période de transition entre l'empire d'Akkad et la troisième dynastie d'Ur, ou bien au tout début de l'expansion de cette dernière, le statut prééminent de Nippur et du temple d'Enlil se voit dans les offrandes faites par le souverain de Lagash Gudea, une inscription commémorant l'hommage qu'il rend au roi des dieux, et des textes du règne de son successeur Ur-Ningirsu II indiquent que les relations entre les deux cités sont étroites. Près d'un vase de Gudea a été mise au jour une barre en cuivre graduée de 110,35 cm, surnommée la « coudée de Nippur », qui pourrait indiquer une norme métrologique.
Nippur reste un centre religieux majeur sous la troisième dynastie d'Ur. Sous le premier roi, Ur-Nammu, le grand temple d'Enlil fait l'objet d'un réaménagement, qui voit notamment l'érection de sa ziggurat. Son successeur Shulgi d'Ur fait reconstruire le temple voisin de la déesse Inanna. Ces bâtiments n'ont pas fait l'objet de réaménagements importants durant les phases suivantes, ce qui fait que leur état connu est largement défini à cette période (voir plus bas). La muraille est également reconstruite à cette période, et sans doute étendue puisque les plus anciennes traces d'un mur dans le secteur WC, au sud-ouest du tell, datent de cette époque, ce qui reflète une extension de l'espace urbanisé. Également sous le règne de Shulgi, la ville de Puzrish-Dagan (le site de Drehem) est créée à proximité de Nippur, pour servir dans l'administration d'un système de redistribution de différents produits prélevés dans des parties de l'Empire et réexpédiés ailleurs (système du bala), avant tout du bétail. Les temples de la ville de Nippur sont de loin les principaux récipiendaires de ces animaux pour leur culte, aussi ces archives sont une source majeure pour reconstituer l'activité cultuelle de cette période. Les rois d'Ur III se font couronner en premier dans le temple d'Enlil, avant de faire de même à Ur puis Uruk, les villes dynastiques, et restaurent et honorent régulièrement les temples de la ville, qui est alors devenue une sorte de « centre cultuel national ». En fait, au-delà de ce statut religieux, il y a des indices plaidant en faveur du fait que Nippur (et sa région) soit le centre de l'empire, donc sa « capitale », plutôt qu'Ur, du moins au temps de Shulgi et de son successeur Amar-Sîn : Nippur, Puzrish-Dagan et une autre ville proche, Tummal, qui est alors un important lieu de culte, ont servi de résidences royales sous cette dynastie, les textes indiquant qu'on trouvait un palais royal dans la seconde, et peut-être dans la troisième ; par ailleurs les missions diplomatiques étrangères connues sont reçues à Nippur.

 
Les tablettes provenant de Nippur (au moins 3 300, la plupart inédites) pour cette période fournissent des informations sur son administration et sa société, celles qui sont publiées provenant essentiellement depuis les archives du temple d'Inanna (environ 1 160 textes), tandis que ce sont les textes administratifs de Puzrish-Dagan qui renseignent sur la vie cultuelle. Pour cette époque sont notamment documentées les activités d'une grande famille, celle des descendants d'Ur-meme, dont l'ancêtre est à la tête de l'administration du temple d'Inanna (titre ugula) au début de la domination des rois d'Ur. Ses descendants se scindent en deux branches : une première qui garde le contrôle de l'administration du temple d'Inanna (ugula puis šabra) et dont certains membres font par ailleurs partie du clergé d'Enlil (titre nu-èš), et d'autres sont des scribes ; et une seconde dont les chefs de famille sont gouverneurs (ensí) de la province de Nippur. Les activités des administrateurs du temple d'Inanna sont bien connues dans les archives de gestion du temple, qui offrent des informations sur ses domaines agricoles, son cheptel, ainsi que les différents mouvements de produits dans ses magasins, notamment leur redistribution pour le culte et les rations d'entretien. De nombreuses personnes gravitent autour de ce temple, en plus de ses officiants. C'est un acteur économique important, qui possède des champs, emploie des artisans (notamment des forgerons) et des marchands de la ville. Il est très intégré dans l'économie locale, puisque les personnes qu'il emploie travaillent également avec les autres temples, et le pouvoir central qui supervise l'activité des temples par l'intermédiaire du gouverneur. L'imbrication entre « public » et « privé » à cette période se voit dans la « Maison J » du secteur de fouilles TB pour cette période (niveaux IX à V), vaste bâtiment (environ 20 × 30 m) organisé autour de trois cours desservant un ensemble de petites pièces remaniées à plusieurs reprises, dont les tablettes documentent notamment les activités d'un certain Ur-Sîn, qui semble être un superviseur d'équipes de laboureurs (nu-bànda gu4) pour le compte d'une institution, mais conduit également des activités privées (vente d'esclave) ; la partie nord-ouest de ce bâtiment semble avoir une fonction administrative, tandis que la partie sud-est a pu servir de résidence. Les textes de cette période documentant les activités privées couvrent une vaste gamme de domaines : contrats de prêts surtout, mais aussi de location, de vente, d'adoption, de mariage, comptes-rendus liés à des procès, etc.

Nippur à l'époque paléo-babylonienne
Les fouilles de Nippur ont livré une documentation abondante datant des premiers siècles de la période paléo-babylonienne (v. 2004-1595 av. J.-C.), notamment de la période d'Isin-Larsa (v. 2020-1750, précédant la domination babylonienne). Il s'agit de textes administratifs issus de grands organismes (surtout des temples), mais aussi d'archives privées, nous informant notamment sur les pratiques juridiques de la période (contrats de vente, adoptions, procès). Les textes littéraires et scolaires sont également nombreux, ce qui montre que Nippur est un foyer culturel majeur de la Basse Mésopotamie à cette période.

Nippur dans le jeu politique de la période Isin-Larsa
À partir du règne d'Ibbi-Sîn, le royaume d'Ur III entre dans une phase de déclin rapide. Une crise économique grave touche le pays de Sumer durant la seconde moitié du XXIe siècle. Profitant de ce contexte, le gouverneur de la cité d'Isin, Ishbi-Erra, voisine de Nippur, se rend indépendant d'Ur. À Nippur même les lots d'archives cessent au début du règne d'Ibbi-Sîn (vers 2020 selon la chronologie moyenne) et on n'en connaît ensuite qu'une soixantaine d'années plus tard, sous la domination d'Isin. Entre-temps, le royaume d'Ur a été définitivement abattu par une armée venue d'Élam (en 2004). Nippur reste alors sous la domination des rois d'Isin, qui tentent de reprendre l'héritage d'Ur III, mais se heurtent à des nouveaux rivaux, les souverains de la cité de Larsa. Sumu-El, roi de cette dernière, réussit à soustraire temporairement Nippur à Bur-Sîn d'Isin durant la première moitié du XIXe siècle. La ville sainte passe définitivement sous le contrôle de Larsa à la suite de la conquête menée par Warad-Sîn (1834-1823), au moment où Isin est en déclin. Mais Larsa doit alors faire face à un nouveau rival, Babylone. Sîn-muballit de Babylone réussit à prendre Nippur momentanément, avant que le nouveau roi de Larsa, Rîm-Sîn, ne la reprenne. C'est son successeur Hammurabi qui réussit à détruire le royaume de Larsa, et à s'emparer de Nippur vers 1764.
La situation politique de Nippur entre la fin du royaume d'Ur III et la fin de la rivalité des premières dynasties dites amorrites (Isin, Larsa, puis Babylone) a donné lieu à plusieurs interprétations. Il est probable que Nippur ne souffre pas beaucoup de ces rivalités : les pouvoirs locaux restent en place, et changent seulement de maître. Chacun des souverains dominant Nippur s'en sert pour sa légitimité, la possession de la cité étant le signe que l'on a été choisi par le grand dieu Enlil pour exercer une domination sur la Basse Mésopotamie. En retour, les rois gratifient les temples de la cité sainte d'offrandes. Les archives retrouvées à Nippur pour cette période ne montrent pas de bouleversement dans les structures sociales et économiques par rapport aux siècles précédents. Reste à savoir quelle a été l'attitude des élites locales. L'opinion la plus couramment admise est qu'elles ont subi les événements, et ont changé de maître en fonction des victoires politiques, la cité étant alors une « récompense » très prisée. Mais il est possible qu'elles aient cherché à profiter de la situation, et appuyé volontairement certains rois à des moments précis, en tirant profit du prestige de la cité et de sa richesse. Selon ce scénario, les rois n'auraient donc jamais conquis la cité, ce seraient ses élites qui les auraient choisis au gré des luttes de factions internes. Quoi qu'il en soit, le statut de la ville lui permet apparemment d'être épargnée par les destructions.

Les institutions et groupes sociaux
L'organisation de l'administration de la cité de Nippur est très floue. La documentation de la période nous montre qu'un personnage nommé gú-en-na/guennakkum dispose d'une administration importante, constituant un « grand organisme », et il se pourrait qu'il s'agisse du gouverneur de la ville, car à la période kassite ce titre lui est dévolu (voir plus bas). Mais les fonctions exercées par les différents cadres administratifs attestés pour cette période ne sont pas claires. Les temples demeurent des structures économiques importantes, très actives, dont les activités dans l'agriculture et l'élevage sont toujours bien documentées, et autour desquelles gravitent de nombreuses personnes, dans le cadre d'une gestion centralisée et redistributive des ressources. 
Les élites sociales disposent des principales charges cultuelles des temples (notamment les charges « domestiques » : brasseurs, cuisinier, portier du dieu), attribuées suivant le système de la prébende. Ces charges peuvent être transmises par héritage, vendues, et même partagées entre plusieurs personnes les exerçant à tour de rôle. Elles sont partie prenante dans les stratégies patrimoniales puisqu'elles donnent accès à des concessions de terres et donc des rémunérations qui peuvent être importantes, d'autant plus qu'elles pouvaient se cumuler, mêlant ainsi les intérêts « publics » des sanctuaires et « privés » des familles de notables. Cela est notamment attesté par un des lots d'archives de la période, celui du dénommé Atta, apparemment détenteur à l'origine de la prébende de « brasseur » (lú-bappir/sirāšūm) du temple du dieu Shamash et acquéreur de plusieurs autres prébendes.
Un groupe social particulier joue un rôle important à Nippur, celui des religieuses (lukur/nadītum ; aussi ugbabtum) vouées par leurs familles à des dieux, principalement Ninurta dans cette cité, et qui ne peuvent se marier. Elles vivent dans un quartier spécifique, appelé ki-lukur-ra (littéralement « le lieu des lukur » en sumérien ; souvent traduit par « cloître ») où elles sont surveillées par un administrateur. Leur condition leur offre néanmoins plus d'autonomie que les femmes restées dans les maisonnées, car elles peuvent posséder leurs propres biens et les gérer, plusieurs tablettes économiques indiquant qu'elles procèdent à des achats et ventes de propriétés, ainsi qu'à des prêts.

Les secteurs résidentiels
Plusieurs résidences d'époque paléo-babylonienne ont été mises au jour dans la zone résidentielle de Tablet Hill, dans les secteurs TA (niveaux XIV à IX des fouilleurs, dont la chronologie est sans doute à modifier) et TB (niveaux D, E et de I à III). Ces habitations ont livré un abondant matériel domestique, notamment des céramiques, ainsi qu'une grande quantité de tablettes qui ont permis d'identifier les propriétaires de plusieurs d'entre elles. En revanche aucune sépulture n'y a été découverte, contrairement à ce qui a été constaté lors des fouilles des résidences contemporaines d'Ur. Le secteur TA, le plus vaste des deux (20 × 40 mètres), est desservi par une rue d'axe nord-est/sud-ouest qui s'arrête dans la zone fouillée, bordée par des résidences en briques crues accolées les unes aux autres, qui sont généralement de taille modeste, avec un petit nombre de pièces, mais peuvent comporter des aménagements assez sophistiqués, notamment des pièces d'eau. L'identification des fonctions des pièces reste difficile. Les plus grandes salles, comprenant parfois un foyer, sont sans doute des pièces de réception. Ces résidences ont souvent un plan irrégulier à la suite de divers remaniements, certaines ayant un espace central organisant la circulation entre les pièces, qui était peut-être une cour à ciel ouvert, tandis que les plus simples ont un plan linéaire. La question de savoir si elles avaient un étage n'est pas clarifiée, les escaliers mis au jour dans certaines pouvant être destinés à un accès sur leur toit en terrasse. La confrontation des découvertes architecturales avec les tablettes mises au jour dans les résidences a par ailleurs permis à E. Stone d'expliquer les évolutions de la maison I, d'une cinquantaine de mètres carrés, appartenant au début de la période à Ilum-nasi, puis partagée entre ses quatre fils suivant un principe égalitaire (comme le veut la coutume de Nippur), puis connaissant d'autres réorganisations après le rachat des parts des deux aînés par les deux benjamins, jusqu'à ce que sa majeure partie soit achetée par un membre d'une autre famille, Enlil-nisu, propriétaire de l'archive qui a permis de déterminer ces évolutions. Seule la Maison K du niveau XII est un cas typique de maison à cour centrale et vestibule dans ce secteur, forme de résidence des catégories urbaines aisées de Babylonie de cette période (comme cela se voit à Ur), reflétant la position de ses possesseurs, membres de la riche famille des descendants de Ninlil-zimu. En revanche dans la zone TB, plusieurs résidences de ce type sont attestées comme la Maison D qui dispose de la plus vaste cour centrale, et la C du niveau II, organisée autour de deux cours avant d'être scindée en deux au niveau suivant. Y résident des personnes occupant des fonctions dans l'administration des grands organismes de la ville, comme Atta mentionné plus haut qui habite dans la maison O (partiellement dégagée) sous le règne de Samsu-iluna (v. 1750-1720, correspondant au niveau I), et certaines ont peut-être une fonction officielle. D'autres résidences paléo-babyloniennes ont été fouillées ailleurs à Nippur : sur le tell occidental, dans la zone WB, les fouilleurs ont mis au jour la résidence d'un boulanger, le pain étant cuit à l'extérieur de la maison dans des fours de type tannour. Les textes retrouvés sur place montrent que le boulanger travaillait pour l'administration de la ville, le temple de Ninurta, ainsi que des individus à titre privé.

Enseignement et vie intellectuelle
Les résidences de Tablet Hill ont initialement été identifiées par l'un des premiers fouilleurs du site comme une bibliothèque du temple d'Enlil en raison de l'abondante documentation relative à la littérature religieuse qu'elles ont livrée. La plupart des grands textes littéraires mésopotamiens, en particulier ceux issus de la tradition sumérienne, ont en effet été retrouvés sur le site de Nippur, ainsi que divers types de textes religieux et techniques. Par la suite avec la mise en évidence de leur contexte résidentiel et l'identification de la plupart de ces documents comme des copies faites dans le cadre d'exercices scolaires, elles ont pu être interprétées comme des écoles de scribes, et Tablet Hill a aussi été surnommée Scribal Quarter, le « Quartier des scribes ». La Maison F du niveau XI du quartier TA a ainsi livré plus de 1 400 de ces documents. Les scribes évoluaient notamment dans le milieu des temples, dont les prêtres étaient également des lettrés. Mais il est plus probable que l'enseignement se fasse dans un cadre privé, souvent au domicile de l'enseignant, et donc aucun bâtiment dédié spécifiquement à l'enseignement n’a pu être identifié, ni des bibliothèques. 
Les documents en question sont donc des tablettes scolaires reprenant des œuvres littéraires, rédigées comme exercices par des apprentis scribes sous la direction et la surveillance des « maîtres » (um-mi-a) possédant les résidences où ont été trouvées les tablettes. Le cursus scolaire des apprentis scribes a pu être reconstitué à partir des sources de Nippur, couplées à celles d'Ur datant approximativement de la même époque. Un premier niveau permettait aux élèves d’apprendre les bases de l’écriture cunéiforme, à partir de listes énumératives de signes qu’ils devaient mémoriser et apprendre à tracer. Les tablettes destinées à cet enseignement sont divisées en 2 ou 3 colonnes, le maître inscrivant dans celle de gauche les signes que l’élève doit tenter de reproduire dans la partie droite. Les élèves commencent à apprendre des textes plus longs. Au niveau supérieur, ils s’exercent sur des compositions littéraires, et font des exercices numériques et géométriques. L’enseignement de ce niveau se fait beaucoup à l’aide de listes lexicales (syllabaires, vocabulaires, listes métrologiques et numériques, etc.). L'apprentissage du sumérien, ainsi que celui de la rédaction de contrats débutent. Les élèves peuvent ensuite se spécialiser dans un domaine plus précis, une fois les bases acquises. On sait par plusieurs textes que Nippur était en particulier renommée pour sa formation juridique, puisqu'elle est désignée dans un texte comme la « ville des juges ».

L’abandon de Nippur
Sous le règne du successeur de Hammurabi, Samsu-iluna, les cités du pays de Sumer se soulèvent contre Babylone. Entre 1740 et 1739, le roi babylonien réussit à reprendre le dessus sur les insurgés, et réprime la révolte. Il ne conserve cependant pas le contrôle de la ville, qui passe dans les années suivantes (vers 1710) sous le contrôle d'Ilum-ma-ili, premier roi de la première dynastie du Pays de la Mer, comme l'indiquent une poignée de textes mis au jour à Nippur. Ces années voient apparemment une grave crise économique et peut-être même écologique survenir d'abord dans le sud de la Basse Mésopotamie, puis dans la partie centrale, dont Nippur. Les luttes continuent par la suite, puisqu'un texte de Dur-Abi-eshuh, une lettre adressée au roi babylonien Ammi-ditana (vers 1670), indique que Nippur est attaquée par un ennemi qui est sans doute le Pays de la Mer, qui soumet l'Ekur à un pillage. D'autres textes provenant du même site indiquent que les cultes du Nippur ont alors été transférés sur place, comme c'est le cas pour d'autres temples méridionaux délaissés à cette époque dont le culte est transféré plus au nord.
Les traces d'une occupation à Nippur après la fin du XVIIIe siècle av. J.-C. et pour la période suivante (dont la durée est débattue : de un à deux siècle(s)) sont donc limitées, la ville étant progressivement désertée et plusieurs de ses quartiers investis par des dunes (aparnas), comme l'indique la présence de couches sableuses sur les niveaux postérieurs à la période paléo-babylonienne dans les secteurs TC, WA et WB. Le cours de l'Euphrate semble se déplacer et ne plus irriguer Nippur, ce qui aurait alors provoqué une crise agraire. Ce phénomène se retrouve dans plusieurs autres grandes villes méridionales (Uruk, Ur, Girsu, Isin). La situation politique et sociale de la Babylonie centrale et méridionale pour cette période est très mal connue, même s'il semble que la dynastie du Pays de la Mer poursuit son existence et que les rois de Babylone y perdent toute autorité, avant la fin de leur dynastie vers 1595 av. J.-C. Un des rois du Pays de la Mer, Ayadaragalama, a fait rédiger un hymne en sumérien adressé aux dieux de Nippur, mais cela n'implique pas forcément qu'il domine cette ville.

Un centre religieux du pays de Sumer et d'Akkad : croyances, sanctuaires et culte
Nippur est marquée au IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. et au IIe millénaire av. J.-C. par son statut de ville sainte de la Basse Mésopotamie, cité du dieu suprême Enlil. Cela lui confère non seulement une grande importance dans la vie politique et religieuse du pays, mais aussi un statut à part dans le domaine théologique, qui apparaît dans de nombreux textes. Son statut décline à partir de la seconde moitié du IIe millénaire av. J.-C., quand le statut du dieu Enlil est remis en cause par l'ascension du dieu Marduk de Babylone, qui reprend la fonction de dieu souverain, et par la même occasion Babylone devient dans la théologie une capitale cosmique en reprenant les traits attribués auparavant à Nippur, ce qui n'empêche pas cette dernière de rester un important centre religieux. La vie religieuse de Nippur est par ailleurs connue par la fouille de plusieurs temples, à commencer par ceux d'Enlil et Inanna/Ishtar, ainsi que les trouvailles d'objets qui y ont eu lieu. Les tablettes cunéiformes mises au jour à Nippur et dans d'autres sites de Basse Mésopotamie (notamment Puzrish-Dagan) fournissent d'autres informations précieuses sur la vie religieuse de Nippur, et plusieurs textes des époques récentes indiquent la continuité de certaines traditions cultuelles anciennes dans cette cité.

Le panthéon de Nippur
La principale divinité de Nippur est le grand dieu Enlil, qui est dans la théologie mésopotamienne, au moins à partir du milieu du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C., le roi du Ciel et de la Terre, le roi des dieux, apparaissant en première place dans les listes de divinités, un dieu qui confère la royauté, et plus largement celui qui fixe le destin des hommes. L'importance du lien de la ville avec cette divinité se manifeste clairement dans l'écriture, puisque la ville est désignée à partir du début du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. par le logogramme EN.LÍLKI, « Ville d'Enlil ». Sa parèdre est la déesse Ninlil, qui dispose également de son temple principal à Nippur.
L'autre divinité majeure de Nippur est Ninurta, fils d'Enlil et de Ninlil d'après la théologie. C'est un dieu aux fonctions à la fois agraires et guerrières, qui dispose d'une place importante dans la mythologie mésopotamienne et a joui d'une grande popularité jusqu'aux époques récentes. Il a été proposé que Ninurta ait été la divinité tutélaire d'origine de Nippur, et non son père Enlil. Les indices en ce sens sont notamment le fait que sa parèdre soit la déesse appelée « Dame de Nippur » (Nin-Nibru) et non celle de son père, que c'est en son nom à lui que sont prêtés les serments dans la cité (en particulier à l'époque Sargonique) et que les religieuses-nadītum de la ville à l'époque paléo-babylonienne lui sont vouées et non pas à Enlil, alors qu'en général elles sont consacrées à la divinité tutélaire de la ville. D'autres divinités de l'entourage divin d'Enlil étaient vénérées à Nippur, en premier lieu Nusku, dieu de la lumière, autre fils d'Enlil et de Ninlil, qui est souvent présenté comme le « vizir » du roi des dieux, et dont la parèdre est la déesse Shuzianna.
L'importance de Nippur en tant que centre religieux se voit par ailleurs dans le grand nombre de divinités qui disposaient d'un lieu de culte, qu'il s'agisse d'un temple dont elles sont la divinité principale ou d'une chapelle dans un sanctuaire. Les textes de distributions d'offrandes pour le culte fournissent des informations sur la composition du paysage divin de Nippur aux périodes d'Ur III et paléo-babylonienne. Par ailleurs des textes de théologie et topographie religieuse d'époque récente fournissent des informations similaires : le Compendium de Nippur, un commentaire portant notamment sur les noms de temples, de divinités et de rituels, et une liste des temples de Nippur. On y retrouve plusieurs des divinités majeures de la Mésopotamie antique : la déesse Inanna-Ishtar qui est une des divinités les plus importantes de Nippur, surnommée « Reine de Nippur », à laquelle est notamment dédié un bel hymne d'époque paléo-babylonienne ou kassite, le dieu-soleil Utu/Shamash, la déesse-guérisseuse Gula (aux époques anciennes Nin-gagia/Nin-egia, Nintinugga ou Ninisinna) qui devient aux époques récentes la « Dame de Nippur » parèdre de Ninurta, la déesse du savoir Nisaba, etc.

Enlil et Nippur dans la pensée religieuse et politique
Si Nippur n'a jamais été l'origine d'une dynastie importante, son statut de ville du principal dieu du panthéon du pays de Sumer et d'Akkad lui a conféré un prestige religieux et politique majeur. Dès l'époque des dynasties archaïques la position dominante d'Enlil est consacrée par les souverains des principales cités-État sumériennes, et cette position est confirmée par la suite, sous les rois d'Akkad puis d'Ur III. La période d'Isin-Larsa voit la position de Nippur en tant que ville sainte se consolider, notamment sous la dynastie d'Isin, cité voisine de Nippur. La lutte pour la possession de la cité dans la première partie de la période paléo-babylonienne montre comment la domination sur Nippur est quelque chose de déterminant du point de vue symbolique. 
La littérature religieuse et politique développée sous l'égide des rois d'Ur III et d'Isin fait donc une grande place à Nippur, et ce d'autant plus que cette ville était un des principaux lieux d'enseignement et sans doute aussi de production savante (y compris théologique) de l'époque, ayant une tradition théologique propre dont l'influence était considérable. Les dieux de Nippur occupent une place importante dans la littérature mythologique (Enlil et Ninlil, Lugal-e, Retour de Ninurta à Nippur, etc.) et « para-mythologique » (souvent historiographique) de cette période. La Malédiction d'Akkad relate comment le roi Naram-Sîn d'Akkad perd la faveur du dieu Enlil, et en représailles commet le sacrilège de piller son grand temple à Nippur, ce qui entraîne sa chute. La Lamentation sur la destruction de Sumer et d'Akkad et la Lamentation sur Nippur véhiculent un même message, cette fois-ci transposé pour la dynastie d'Ur III, qui a perdu le soutien du dieu Enlil, et chute dans le chaos causant la destruction de Nippur. Plusieurs textes mythologiques font par ailleurs référence à des voyages de divinités se rendant à Nippur pour présenter leurs hommages à Enlil (en premier lieu Enki et Nanna). Le rôle cosmique de Nippur est mis en exergue dans plusieurs textes, notamment Enlil dans l'Ekur, un hymne glorifiant Enlil, son sanctuaire, ses célébrations religieuses, son clergé ; le temple est présenté comme ayant été érigé par le dieu en personne, imposant le respect à tous les pays, et construit au centre du Monde, Duranki le « lien entre le Ciel et la Terre » (dur-an-ki). Le Chant de la houe, mythe de création, débute par la séparation du Ciel et de la Terre par Enlil à Nippur/Duranki, servant d'axe de l'Univers, et l'Hymne à la Reine de Nippur évoque la cité en ces termes : « Nippur, lien du Ciel et de la Terre, jonction des quatre parties (de l'Univers), grandissant sur une montagne inaccessible ». 
À partir de la seconde moitié du IIe millénaire av. J.-C., le statut d'Enlil et de Nippur est remis en cause par la montée en puissance de Marduk, dieu de Babylone, capitale politique du Sud mésopotamien qui devient progressivement une capitale religieuse. Cette évolution s'accompagne de l'intégration de nombreuses caractéristiques d'Enlil en tant que roi des dieux par Marduk (et également l'aspect guerrier de Ninurta), et de même le rôle cosmique de Nippur esquissé dans les textes religieux est transposé et développé pour Babylone (notamment dans l'Enuma Elish). Le culte de Marduk est implanté à Babylone dès l'époque kassite où une grande fête en son honneur est célébrée et par la suite il conserve une place importante dans la ville en étant identifié à son grand dieu. De la même manière, en Assyrie le dieu national Assur et son culte intègrent de nombreux éléments théologiques d'Enlil et de Nippur.

Le sanctuaire d'Enlil
Le temple d'Enlil, Ekur (sumérien é-kur « Maison-montagne » ; on trouve aussi à plusieurs reprises l'épithète é-nam-ti-la, « Maison de la vie » et  dur-an-ki, « Lien entre le Ciel et la Terre »), était situé au cœur de Nippur. C'était sans doute le principal centre religieux de la Basse Mésopotamie jusqu'à ce qu'Enlil soit supplanté par Marduk, dieu de Babylone, durant la seconde moitié du IIe millénaire. Les rois voulant dominer la Mésopotamie venaient s'y faire consacrer, ce qui symbolisait qu'ils avaient été choisis par le dieu garant de la royauté. On considérait que les dieux se réunissaient en assemblées présidées par Enlil, leur roi, dans l'enceinte de l'Ekur, pour y prendre des décisions déterminantes pour l'avenir de l'humanité. Elles avaient peut-être lieu sous la forme d'un rassemblement de statues divines, considérées comme étant les garantes de la présence divine sur Terre.
Les niveaux de l'Ekur remontant au-delà de la Troisième dynastie d'Ur (2112-2004) n'ont pu être dégagés. La phase la plus ancienne que l'on connaisse remonte à la reconstruction de ce temple par le premier roi de cette même dynastie, Ur-Nammu. Le temple remontait sans doute au milieu du IIIe millénaire, comme on l'apprend par une inscription de Mesannepadda, roi d'Ur, qui y fit faire des travaux. Par la suite, Naram-Sin d'Akkad entreprend des travaux pour l'agrandir, et son fils Shar-kali-sharri mène le gros de l'ouvrage. Les rapports entre Naram-Sîn et Nippur sont ambigus. Certes il débute la reconstruction de l'Ekur, mais la tradition garde en mémoire le fait qu'il lui ait nui (notamment dans la Malédiction d'Akkad). On ne sait pas à quoi cela fait référence, il a été proposé que ce soit lié au fait qu'il ait détruit l'ancien temple dans le but de le reconstruire, choquant les partisans locaux de la tradition sumérienne, ou bien au fait qu'il se soit fait déifier, ce qui aurait pu être perçu comme un sacrilège. Quoi qu'il en soit les textes relatifs à la reconstruction du temple sous son patronage et celui de son fils permettent de constater qu'ils n'ont pas été avares dans leur entreprise, consacrant environ 29 kilos d'or pour la réalisation de disques solaires et croissants de lune, et 200 kilos d'argent pour réaliser d'autres ornements ; la porte du temple était gardée par deux grandes statues en cuivre de génies appelés lahmu, deux paires de bisons en cuivre, et des dragons en métal. Ur-Nammu remania l'ensemble, et par la suite plusieurs souverains devaient le restaurer sans en modifier grandement le plan (entre autres plusieurs rois kassites, Nabuchodonosor Ier, les rois assyriens Assarhaddon et Assurbanipal) et le couvrir d'offrandes.
Les fouilles ont révélé que l'Ekur était organisé autour d'une grande cour (kisal-mah) protégée par une enceinte dans laquelle se trouvaient des pièces annexes. L'ensemble devait par la suite conserver un aspect similaire malgré les différentes phases de reconstruction, au moins jusqu'à l'époque néo-babylonienne dont les niveaux sont moins bien connus car ils ont été perturbés par les réaménagements du secteur à l'époque parthe. L'ensemble était dominé par le temple sur terrasse, ou ziggurat, dont les textes plus tardifs indiquent qu'elle avait pour nom cérémoniel Esagdil (é-sag-dil « Maison des secrets »), ayant une base de 57 × 39,40 mètres, et dont le premier étage mesurait au moins 6 mètres de haut. On l'escaladait par un escalier perpendiculaire de 15 mètres de long pour 6,50 de large. Son sommet comportait un temple, avec une cella nommée E-hursag-galam(ma), « Maison-Montagne construite avec habileté », qui apparaît à plusieurs dans des listes d'offrandes de l'époque d'Ur III comme récipiendaire de sacrifices, au même titre que le trône du dieu (sur lequel se trouvait sa statue de culte assurant sa présence sur terre), ce qui indique qu'ils avaient été investis d'une partie de la divinité d'Enlil. Un édifice situé dans une cour juste au pied de la ziggurat avait un aspect particulier : ses murs étaient épais, et il était organisé autour d'une succession de petites pièces agencées autour de deux plus grandes salles rectangulaires, identifiées par leur fouilleur comme des cellae (elles disposaient à l'époque kassite de banquettes et autels). On a mis au jour dans l'édifice du matériel destiné à la cuisson, qui a donné lieu à une interprétation de la fonction de l'édifice : ce serait un « Temple-cuisine » (suivant une interprétation d'un édifice à Ur situé également aux pieds de la ziggurat) où l'on préparait les offrandes rituelles destinées à Enlil, le temple principal où il résidait (incarné par sa statue de culte) étant manifestement celui situé au sommet de la ziggurat. Au sud-est de la grande cour se trouvait une autre cour de taille importante, plus petite, dans laquelle n'a été mis au jour qu'un petit édifice lors des fouilles de la fin du XIXe siècle, dont les relevés sont difficilement exploitables. Il a livré deux inscriptions qui datent sa fondation du règne d'Amar-Sîn d'Ur III, et font de l'édifice une chapelle liée au culte d'Enlil. Les textes indiquent par ailleurs que l'on trouvait d'autres édifices cultuels dans l'Ekur, notamment la « Cour de l'assemblée (divine) » (ub-šu-ukkin-na) où étaient censés se réunir les dieux de Sumer sous la direction d'Enlil, ainsi qu'un « Grand jardin » ((é-)giškiri6-mah). Une tablette topographique et métrologique d'époque kassite (ou paléo-babylonienne) fournissant la dimension des temples de Nippur et de leurs annexes indique que l'Ekur comprenait également un ensemble de dépendances (é-ahê u takalātum), notamment les résidences de prêtres (en et lagar).

Les temples de l'entourage d'Enlil
Les textes topographiques et le plan kassite de Nippur indiquent que le temple de la déesse Ninlil, parèdre d'Enlil, se trouvait à proximité du temple d'Enlil. Il a pu être proposé qu'il s'agissait de la cour sud-est dégagée dans le complexe de l'Ekur, mais cela n'est pas confirmé par les éléments architecturaux et épigraphiques qui y ont été mis au jour. Le nom cérémoniel du temple de Ninlil était Ekiur (é-ki-ùr « Maison, lieu nivelé (?) ») et qui est attesté dans de nombreux textes, de même que sa cella qui portait le nom cérémoniel « Maison, chambre du tabouret » ((é-)gá-giš-šú-a). Le texte métrologique de description des temples mentionne par ailleurs qu'on y trouvait une « Maison des dames » (é-bēleti), sans doute les prêtresses de la déesse, et d'un ensemble de dépendances. La déesse disposait également d'un important lieu de culte à Tummal, cité située au sud de Nippur (peut-être le site de Tell Dlehim, une vingtaine de kilomètres au sud), où se déroulaient sous la période d'Ur III d'importantes festivités. Enlil et Ninlil disposaient également d'un temple conjoint, mentionné dans plusieurs textes (nom cérémoniel é-kur-igi-gal, quelque chose comme « Maison, montagne douée de vision »), apparemment dans le secteur de l'Ekur.
Le temple de Ninurta, fils d'Enlil et de Ninlil, avait pour nom cérémoniel Eshumesha (é-šu-me-ša4, sens indéterminé). C'est un temple important si l'on se fie aux textes de la topographie religieuse de Nippur, qui le placent toujours en troisième position après ceux de ses parents. Il n'a pas été dégagé lors des fouilles, même si des textes rituels qui en proviennent sont connus. Sa localisation reste donc incertaine : il a été suggéré qu'il se trouvait sur le tell des temples, ou bien sur le tell occidental là où se trouve temple identifié pour les phases récentes comme étant celui de Gula (secteur WA ; voir plus bas), puisqu'elle était alors sa parèdre, assimilée à la déesse appelée « Dame de Nippur » (Nin-Nibru) des phases antérieures, et que les anciens mésopotamiens avaient l'habitude d'associer les couples divins dans les sanctuaires (le temple de Gula dans sa cité d'Isin comprend d'ailleurs une chapelle de Ninurta). Le texte métrologique cite en tout cas le temple de Ninurta et celui de la Dame de Nippur côte à côte, et leurs principales composantes architecturales sont comme pour les autres temples une grande cour et des bâtiments servant aux desservants du temple et pour le stockage. 
Enfin, un autre temple d'une divinité de l'entourage d'Enlil est celui du dieu Nusku. Il dispose d'un temple mentionné par le texte de description des temples de Nippur, dont on sait par d'autres textes qu'il avait pour nom cérémoniel « Maison, éclat lumineux du Ciel » (é-me-lám-an-na) ou « Maison à l'éclat terrifiant » (é-me-lám-huš). Son culte est attesté par une tablette d'époque paléo-babylonienne indiquant qu'on y vénérait aussi son père Enlil, sa parèdre Shuzianna, et les dieux jumeaux Lugal-irra et Meslamta-ea.

Le temple d'Inanna de Nippur
Le temple le plus important après l'Ekur qui ait été dégagé est celui dédié à la déesse Inanna/Ishtar, appelé tantôt Eduranki (nom servant parfois à désigner également le sanctuaire d'Enlil) ou Ebaradurgara (é-bára-dúr-gara « Maison, podium du Trône »), situé au sud-ouest du temple d'Enlil. Il remonte à la période d'Uruk moyen (milieu du IVe millénaire), période à laquelle le bâtiment n'a apparemment pas de fonction cultuelle. Il a connu par la suite une dizaine de reconstructions, jusqu'à l'époque parthe. 
Le niveau IX s'étale sur une longue période ; sa cella était peut-être à ciel ouvert. Les niveaux VIII et VII (fin du dynastique archaïque) voient l'agrandissement de l'édifice : sont édifiés un ensemble de salles, de cours assez complexe, menant à une cour à portique qui ouvrait sur deux cellae, dont une précédée d'une antichambre, excentrée par rapport à l’organisation de l’édifice. De nombreuses offrandes caractéristiques des dépôts votifs de cette période y ont été trouvées, enfouies dans le sol, notamment quelques statuettes et plaques ornées de bas-reliefs, des vases en pierre portant des inscriptions votives, ainsi que des plaques de nacre gravées incrustées à l'origine dans des objets qui ont disparu. 

Le temple fut reconstruit par le roi Shulgi d'Ur, au début du XXIe siècle, qui correspond au niveau archéologique IV de l'édifice : on détruisit une partie de l'ancien temple pour constituer un grand bâtiment rectangulaire de 100 × 50 mètres, organisé autour de plusieurs cours ; la cella de cette période a été détruite lors d'un autre réaménagement effectué bien plus tard, sous les Parthes, qui rend également impossible l'analyse du bâtiment aux périodes intermédiaires VI-V et aux périodes suivantes qui ont été reconnues : le niveau III devant correspondre à la période d'Isin-Larsa, le niveau II est d'époque kassite, le niveau I d'époque néo-assyrienne, les phases postérieures ayant totalement disparu. C'est du niveau IV que datent les archives du temple dont il a été question plus haut. Leur mise en relation avec les plans de l'édifice ont permis de tenter de retrouver le fonctionnement spatial du sanctuaire. La partie nord-est semble ainsi être la « chancellerie » du temple.

Les autres temples
Ville religieuse majeure, Nippur comptait de nombreux temples et autres lieux de culte. Deux ont été mis au jour lors des fouilles.
Un complexe cultuel se situait au nord de la partie orientale de la cité, dont la divinité tutélaire n'a pas été identifiée. Il a été nommé « Temple Nord » par les fouilleurs. Sa construction remonte au moins à la période des Dynasties archaïques I (2900-2750), et il est abandonné vers la fin de l'Empire d'Akkad, remplacé par des bâtiments aux fonctions non cultuelles. Ce temple a un plan similaire à celui des temples de la même période, avec une cour entourée des magasins et des cuisines, ouvrant sur le sanctuaire où se trouvait un autel avec une table d'offrandes.
Un dernier temple important est construit à la période d'Ur III sur le tell ouest, dans la zone WA, mais il est surtout connu pour la période néo-babylonienne (VIIe – VIe siècles, voir plus bas). Les offrandes retrouvées datant de cette dernière période ont permis de l'identifier comme un sanctuaire de la déesse Gula. Ce temple constitue peut-être une partie du temple de Ninurta comme évoqué plus haut.

Rituels, fêtes religieuses et calendrier cultuel
La vie cultuelle de Nippur est connue grâce à de nombreuses archives économiques, ainsi que quelques textes rituels et religieux. Au quotidien, les dieux recevaient de nombreuses offrandes, qui apparaissent notamment dans les archives de Drehem pour la période d'Ur III, et diverses tablettes de distributions d'offrandes de l'époque paléo-babylonienne, en particulier les offrandes alimentaires appelées sá-dug/satukku(m), redistribuées aux desservants des temples (agneaux, farine, pain, huile, vin, bière, etc.). Le « clergé » mentionné dans ces textes est constitué de desservants attestés couramment à ces époques (« chantres » nar, « lamentateurs » gala, « purificateurs » gudu4), d'autres à la fonction moins claire mais qui jouent manifestement un rôle important (nu-èš, lagar), des prêtresses ou religieuses déjà évoquées, des prébendaires chargés de la préparation des offrandes et des rituels (comme les « brasseurs » et « portiers »), un administrateur (sanga), et un grand prêtre ou une grande prêtresse (en, ereš dingir) dans le temple du dieu Enlil ; plusieurs grandes prêtresses d'Enlil sont des princesses, comme Tutu-napshum la fille de Narâm-Sîn d'Akkad.

Les archives de l'époque d'Ur III permettent de connaître les principales festivités annuelles (ezem) qui émaillaient le calendrier cultuel de Nippur à cette période. C'est un calendrier de type « luni-solaire » (douze mois lunaires de 29 ou 30 jours), qui se décale par rapport à l'année solaire (plus longue d'une dizaine de jours) et donc du rythme des saisons, nécessitant périodiquement des réajustements par l'ajout de mois intercalaires (diri(g)). Les grandes fêtes religieuses qui donnaient les noms aux mois mettaient en avant les principales divinités du panthéon local. La grande fête dédiée à Ninurta était la fête gusisu (gu4-si-su), qui se déroulait du 20e au 24e jour du second mois de l'année (en principe avril-mai). Cette fête agraire devait son nom aux bœufs de labour (gu4) et ouvrait la période de préparation du matériel aratoire en vue des semailles (qui se déroulent à l'automne) ; elle donnait lieu à des offrandes aux principaux dieux de Nippur, et à une grande offrande à Ninurta le dernier jour, marquée par la récitation de textes religieux et le plantage symbolique des premières semailles. La fête šu-numun á-ki-ti du quatrième mois (juin-juillet) était liée à la préparation des champs céréaliers. Le mois suivant était celui de la fête de l'allumage des brasiers (NE-NE-gar), et le suivant celui de la grande fête de la déesse Inanna (kin-dInanna). Le huitième mois semble être celui d'une fête liée à l'araire (gišapin-du8-a), marquant la fin de la période des labours et semailles (octobre-novembre). C'est peut-être durant ce même mois que se déroule l'une des principales fêtes religieuses de l'époque, celle de la déesse Ninlil à Tummal, durant lequel la statue de la déesse se déplace depuis son temple de Nippur jusque dans cette ville. Le douzième et dernier mois de l'année (février-mars) était celui de la fête des moissons (še-sag11-ku5 ; la récolte avait lieu au printemps), traditionnellement marqué à Sumer par une grande fête, qui n'est attestée assurément que par un texte pour Nippur à cette période, mais d'autres tablettes plus tardives indiquent que ce rituel était associé dans cette ville au grand dieu Enlil. D'autres célébrations avaient lieu exceptionnellement, par exemple lors de la consécration d'objets destinés aux appartements et au trésor des divinités, comme les constructions des barques sacrées d'Enlil et de Ninlil rapportées dans plusieurs noms d'années de ces périodes, et aussi un hymne du règne de Shulgi.  
Le calendrier cultuel de Nippur semble avoir eu une influence sur le calendrier « standard » qui s'impose en Babylonie dans le courant du IIe millénaire av. J.-C., le nom des mois étant écrit avec des logogrammes dérivés des noms de mois du calendrier de Nippur. Le déroulement des festivités à Nippur est moins bien connu pour les périodes postérieures à la période d'Ur III. Les fêtes appelées akītu, principales festivités des villes babyloniennes, sont mentionnées à plusieurs reprises pour Nippur, notamment dans le Compendium de Nippur qui indique que plusieurs se déroulaient lors du premier mois de l'année (Nisannu) : pour Marduk (qui a alors supplanté Enlil à la tête du panthéon), Ninurta, Ishtar la Reine-de-Nippur et Sîn. Ce texte indique également d'autres festivités se déroulant à Nippur, notamment une grande fête à Ishtar, cette fois au cinquième mois, et celle d'Enlil au onzième mois.

La période kassite
Réoccupation et reconstruction du site
La fin du XIVe et le début du XIIIe siècle av. J.-C. voient une phase de réurbanisation de la Babylonie centrale et méridionale, qui se traduit par le repeuplement de Nippur, sous le règne de la dynastie kassite de Babylone qui a éliminé vers 1500 la dynastie du Pays de la Mer. Le plus ancien texte de Nippur datant de la période kassite repéré (isolé par rapport au reste des archives) serait daté du règne de Kadashman-Harbe Ier (seconde moitié du XVe siècle av. J.-C.), mais une copie d'une inscription d'un roi antérieur, Kashtiliash III (qui a régné autour de 1500), provient probablement du site ; elle commémore le creusement sous le règne de ce dernier (qui dans l'inscription est simplement présenté comme « gouverneur d'Enlil ») d'un canal approvisionnant Nippur, ce qui indique que les projets d'aménagement de la cité ont débuté dès cette période (correspondant à la phase de conquête du Pays de la Mer). Les réseaux d'irrigation de la région sont remis en état de fonctionnement progressivement, et la cité est à nouveau alimentée en eau. Les plus anciennes activités de restauration et d'offrandes dans un temple de Nippur, principalement dans celui d'Enlil et de Ninlil, remontent au règne de Kurigalzu Ier (début du XIVe siècle av. J.-C.). La muraille est également reconstruite à cette période, englobant sans doute la même surface qu'à l'époque d'Ur III. Cette reprise s'observe également dans les autres grandes villes du Sud de la Babylonie qui ont été dépeuplées au XVIIe siècle. Les souverains de la nouvelle dynastie, qui continuent de considérer Enlil comme le dieu suprême (le temple principal de Dur-Kurigalzu, capitale fondée par Kurigalzu Ier, lui est d'ailleurs consacré et on y retrouve également Ninlil et Ninurta), jouent un rôle important dans cette reprise, comme l'attestent les inscriptions de fondation retrouvées sur le site. Du point de vue du matériel céramique, la rupture avec la période précédente est évidente : les types de l'époque paléo-babylonienne, caractéristiques des sites méridionaux de l'ancien pays de Sumer, ont disparu, sans postérité, pour être remplacés par l'assemblage courant sur les sites de la Babylonie kassite, qui est bien différent et semble plutôt être une évolution de celui présent sur les sites du Nord babylonien durant la période précédente.
Un document exceptionnel de cette période nous montre les grands traits de l'organisation de l'espace dans la ville à cette période : il s'agit d'une carte inscrite sur une tablette d'argile. La reproduction semble assez fidèle. Bien qu'elle soit dans un état fragmentaire, on y distingue les murailles de la cité, sept portes de la ville y sont nommées, ainsi que les temples d'Enlil et de Ninlil, et un grand jardin dans l'angle sud-ouest (le « Jardin de (l'intérieur de) la ville », giš.kiri6 ša uru.ki). Un canal coupe la ville en deux (le « Canal de (l'intérieur de) la ville », id ša uru.ki), alors que l'Euphrate coule en bas de l'enceinte occidentale et un autre canal au nord (appelé Nunbirdu).
Le plan kassite a pu servir de guide lors des fouilles entreprises par l'Institut oriental de Chicago à partir de 1975 sur le tell ouest, où plusieurs tranchées furent creusées et retrouvèrent des sections de la muraille (WC-1 et WC-2), ainsi que le cours d'eau coulant à l'ouest du tell, là où l'Euphrate coulait selon le plan, même si les fouilles indiquent plutôt la présence d'un canal. Dans le secteur des temples, les reconstructeurs de la cité relèvent les temples d'Enlil et d'Ishtar et le temple Nord suivant le tracé des niveaux anciens, ce qui signifie qu'ils n'avaient pas été oubliés, ou bien qu'ils les ont retrouvés en fouillant sur place et en mettant la main sur les anciennes inscriptions de fondation. En revanche dans le secteur de Tablet Hill, TA et TB, là où se trouvaient les quartiers résidentiels dégagés pour l'époque paléo-babylonienne, aucune trace d'occupation importante d'époque kassite n'a été identifiée. Mais la séquence chronologique des fouilleurs de ce site pour les périodes suivant la paléo-babylonienne a été revue à partir d'un nouveau sondage (TC), et il semblerait que le quartier n'ait pas été reconstruit à l'époque kassite sur le sommet du tell, mais plutôt sur ses pentes. Au sud du tell ouest, un palais de la période a été mis au jour (zone WB). Bien que mal conservé, il a été le lieu de trouvailles d'archives, qui ont indiqué qu'il s'agissait probablement de la résidence du gouverneur de la ville, au moins au XIIIe siècle av. J.-C. Plus à l’ouest, dans la zone WC-1 près de la muraille, une vaste construction a été mise au jour, à l'emplacement où se trouvait selon la carte le jardin intérieur (ce qui pourrait indiquer qu'elle a été dressée à un moment où l'édifice ne se trouvait pas encore là). Elle s'étendait sur plus de 500 m², et encore tout l'édifice n'a pas été dégagé. Elle a été interprétée comme une résidence privée, mais une partie de l'édifice pourrait être consacrée à des fonctions publiques. Les tablettes retrouvées sur le site évoquent plusieurs personnes, mais ne permettent pas d'identifier la fonction de la bâtisse.

Administration et société
Les archives médio-babyloniennes de Nippur constituent un ensemble d'environ 12 000 tablettes selon les estimations de J. A. Brinkman, soit une source de première importance pour une période peu documentée (elles représentent environ 90 % des textes exhumés pour la période kassite), cependant seulement 15 % de ces documents ont été publiés. Ces textes couvrent la période allant du règne de Burna-Buriash II (1359-1333 av. J.-C.) à celui de Kadashman-Harbe II (1223 av. J.-C.), soit la seconde partie de la dynastie. O. Pedersén a identifié au moins cinq lieux de provenance à partir des rapports de fouilles, qui ne permettent pas de connaître la provenance de tous les textes mis au jour lors des premières campagnes : des archives administratives dans le secteur WB, surtout datées de la fin de la période, l'archive du gouverneur de Nippur qui constitue la grande majorité du corpus (autour de 10 000 tablettes) ; des archives du temple de Gula (zone WA), surtout des livraisons d'orge pour des boulangers et brasseurs (environ 300 tablettes) ; d'autres lots dans la zone WC-1, de nature administrative et aussi légale, quelques listes lexicales (plus d'une cinquantaine de tablettes) ; enfin deux petites archives privées, comprenant des documents d'affaires, une dans une maison de la colline des tablettes (zone TA, 24 tablettes), une autre à côté du temple de Ninurta (8 tablettes). Les textes sont très variés : liste de personnels et de dépendants (notamment des esclaves), listes établissant les prélèvements faits au titre de taxes ou redevances, documentation comptable concernant l'agriculture, l'élevage, l'artisanat, les entrées et sorties de produits stockés dans les magasins et greniers de l'administration, des contrats de vente d'esclaves, des comptes-rendus de procès, et des décrets officiels. D'autres textes, moins nombreux, sont des lettres de la correspondance du gouverneur, avec les souverains kassites, d'autres gouverneurs, et surtout des subordonnés de l'administration provinciale. Ces tablettes ont souvent des empreintes de sceaux-cylindres, constituant ainsi une source inestimable pour la connaissance de l'art de la glyptique durant la période kassite. D'autres tablettes de provenance exacte inconnue, datées surtout des premières décennies du XIIIe siècle av. J.-C., sont issues des archives d'un centre administratif de la province de Nippur.
Ces documents nous montrent l'administration provinciale kassite, en premier lieu le rôle du gouverneur de Nippur, qui porte le titre particulier de šandabakku (logogrammes gá.dub.ba ou gú.en.na), et non le titre ordinaire des autres gouverneurs provinciaux du royaume (šaknu ou bēl pihāti). Plusieurs gouverneurs cumulent par ailleurs ce titre avec celui de « nêšakku d'Enlil » (nu-èš den-líl), qui semble avoir une signification religieuse même si son sens n'est pas clair (il est également porté par quelques rois kassites). Le gouverneur semble donc disposer d'un régime particulier, sans doute en raison de l'importance religieuse de Nippur, peut-être un pouvoir et une juridiction plus vastes que les autres gouverneurs du royaume kassite. Il supervise en tout cas la gestion des temples de la province de Nippur et de leurs domaines, en premier lieu celui du dieu Enlil, ce qui doit expliquer sa position particulière. Son importance se voit par ailleurs dans l'existence d'une correspondance entre un gouverneur de Nippur et la cour assyrienne. Parmi la correspondance des gouverneurs de Nippur avec d'autres hauts dignitaires du royaume kassite, deux lettres ont particulièrement retenu l'attention puisqu'elles sont envoyées par un certain Ili-ippashra, qui réside à Dilmun (Bahrain) et se dit le « frère » du gouverneur Enlil-kidinni, ce qui indique qu'il a un rang égal et est donc lui-même un gouverneur kassite, ce qui a constitué un premier témoignage de la domination kassite sur l'île du Golfe persique, plus tard confirmée par les fouilles sur place.

Les documents de gestion concernent avant tout les nombreux dépendants gérés par l'administration (membres de l'administration, gardes, artisans, personnel de temples, etc.). Un corpus d'environ 500 textes documente la gestion par l'administration du gouverneur d'une importante population servile, organisée en familles nucléaires, affectée à des travaux agricoles (bergers, laboureurs, jardiniers, etc.) et artisanaux (notamment dans les ateliers de tissage, la préparation des aliments, etc.) ; le phénomène des fuites d'esclaves est important, et mobilise fortement l'attention du gouverneur et de ses agents. Des documents de ventes d'esclaves impliquant le gouverneur Enlil-kidinni (seconde moitié du XIVe siècle av. J.-C.) ont été retrouvés. Une partie de l'archive du gouverneur semble provenir de ses greniers, gérant la distribution de grains à ses serviteurs et dépendants en guise de rations d'entretien (l'équivalent de salaires). Y apparaissent notamment des meuniers et brasseurs, qui doivent exercer leur métier en divers lieux de la province.

Par ailleurs l'administration du gouverneur supervise les domaines agricoles de la région de Nippur, et sans doute de la province voisine du « Bord de la steppe » (Pān ṣēri). Les lettres du gouverneur avec ses subordonnés (notamment ceux à qui ont été concédés des domaines) indiquent qu'il suit l'entretien des principaux canaux d'irrigation pour lesquels il gère là encore les problèmes de main d’œuvre, et les questions d'approvisionnement en eau des différents terroirs (organisés en unités appelées ugāru et tamirtu). Le gouverneur ne semble en revanche pas gérer les canaux d'irrigation secondaires, ni du reste la gestion des domaines qui semblent dépendre des administrateurs locaux de la province. D'autres tablettes courantes sont des sortes de tableaux comptabilisant divers prélèvements en nature ponctionnés sur des agriculteurs par l'administration (notamment le šibšu et le miksu). Les agriculteurs mentionnés dans les textes sont désignés par des termes impliquant l'existence de différents statuts dont le sens est difficile à déterminer : de l'exploitation directe avec des travailleurs payés en ration, les « fermiers » (iššakku) qui sont en charge de champs arables, les « laboureurs » (ikkaru) qui sont des travailleurs agricoles organisés en équipes ; aussi des formes d'exploitation indirecte avec des « cultivateurs » (errēšu) et des « partenaires » (šutāpu) ; sont aussi attestés des « jardiniers » (nukaribbu) qui s'occupent des palmeraies-jardins où se pratiquent l'horticulture, et d'autres catégories spécialisées comme les forestiers, les vanneurs (zērû), les porteurs d'eau (dālû), des moissonneurs (ēṣidu). D'autres textes documentent quant à eux l'activité d'élevage, des troupeaux d'ovins, caprins et bovins étant confiés à des pasteurs (naqīdu) sous la supervision de membres de l'administration (notamment les hazannu, terme désignant généralement un « maire », fonctionnaire local). L'élevage des chevaux a eu une importance particulière, ces animaux ayant fait l'objet de nombreuses attentions. Ils étaient nommés dans les textes et disposaient de rations au même titre que les hommes. Ils étaient décrits par leur pedigree, la couleur de leur robe, la manière avec laquelle on les élevait est décrite, le vocabulaire emploie de nombreux termes empruntés à la langue kassite, témoignant de la maîtrise que ce peuple avait acquise dans l'élevage des chevaux, et qui faisait sa renommée dans tout le Moyen-Orient et était sans doute à la base d'un commerce lucratif. 
D'autres lettres sont des rapports relatifs à divers sujets courants : réparations de bâtiments, travaux d'artisans textiles, etc. Un groupe d'une poignée de lettres concerne par ailleurs l'exercice de la médecine : il s'agit de rapports envoyés par un médecin à un gouverneur sur l'état de plusieurs patientes, des prêtresses. Une autre partie des archives des gouverneurs est relative à leur fonction juridique : des comptes-rendus de procès dans lesquels ils sont intervenus ; un catalogue énumère ceux relatifs à des affaires tranchées par Enlil-kidinni, indiquant qu'il s'agit d'une forme d'archivage public servant à conserver une trace des litiges. 
Enfin, des tablettes scolaires de la période kassite ont été exhumées, certaines étant destinées apparemment à la préparation de futurs scribes de l'administration. Cela montre que Nippur continue sa tradition de centre scolaire, l'enseignement du sumérien continuant notamment à y être dispensé puisqu'on y trouve des fragments de textes littéraires dans cette langue, notamment le Mythe d'Adapa.

Un nouveau déclin
La période kassite s'achève au XIIe siècle av. J.-C., moment à partir duquel la Basse Mésopotamie connaît une nouvelle période de déclin marqué. Nippur fait les frais de conflits de cette époque, puisqu'elle figure parmi les prises du roi élamite Kidin-Hutran sous le règne d'Adad-shuma-iddina (v. 1222-1217), quand il mène des campagnes en Babylonie, selon ce que rapporte une chronique babylonienne plus tardive (Chronique P, iv 14'-16'). Les archives de Nippur de cette période s'arrêtent en tout cas vers la même époque, sous le règne de Kadashman-Harbe II (1223), mais on sait que l'Ekur est restauré par Adad-shuma-usur (1216-1187). 
La dynastie kassite survit jusqu'en 1155 av. J.-C., date à laquelle elle est définitivement vaincue par des attaques élamites. Les trouvailles archéologiques pour les décennies suivantes sont maigres. De la dynastie qui succède aux Kassites, la seconde dynastie d'Isin, date notamment le « kudurru Hinke », mis au jour dans le secteur des temples de Nippur, stèle portant une inscription de donation du roi Nabuchodonosor Ier (c. 1125-1104 av. J.-C.) à un dénommé Nusku-ibni, qui a les titres de nêšakku et de « maire » (hazannu) de Nippur. 
Au siècle suivant, la région de Nippur est plongée dans des troubles comme le reste de la Babylonie, de plus en plus soumise aux incursions de groupes d'Araméens et de Sutéens venus du Nord, qui prennent la ville sous le règne d'Adad-apla-iddina (1069-1048) ; un fragment d'inscription de celui-ci mis au jour à Khorsabad indique par ailleurs qu'il aurait restauré la muraille de Nippur. Les copies tardives d'une inscription du roi Simbar-shipak (c. 1026-1009 av. J.-C.) de la seconde dynastie du Pays de la Mer rapportent le sac de la ville par ces tribus, et notamment la prise de la statue de culte du dieu Enlil, ce qui est un acte d'une grande importance symbolique, rendant le culte au dieu impossible. L'inscription rapporte que les biens importés du temple d'Enlil ont été restitués par un roi assyrien qui les a repris aux Araméens, et la restauration consécutive par Simbar-shipak du trône du dieu Enlil, ce qui semble s'inscrire dans un projet de reprise du culte. 
Cependant la situation politique de la Babylonie ne s'arrange pas dans les années suivantes. Il semblerait que cette situation soit aggravée à Nippur par le déplacement vers l'ouest du cours de l'Euphrate. En tout cas il n'y a plus pour les deux siècles suivants de trace archéologique (là encore avec un hiatus dans la stratigraphie) et épigraphique d'une occupation à Nippur, où les institutions ont considérablement décliné. Si la ville n'a pas forcément été complètement désertée par ses habitants, elle s'est assurément fortement dépeuplée et sa région s'est à nouveau ruralisée.

Nippur dans les Empires du Ier millénaire
Le renouveau de Nippur
Vers le milieu du VIIIe siècle, Nippur entame une nouvelle phase de croissance. Cela est probablement lié à un changement du cours de l'Euphrate, qui coule à nouveau à côté de la ville. Cela se fait dans un contexte de reprise de l'activité en Basse Mésopotamie. Mais le paysage ethnique de la région a bien changé depuis la fin du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. Des mouvements migratoires ont amené des tribus d'Araméens et de Chaldéens dans l'arrière-pays de Nippur, où les premiers se livrent surtout à une activité d'élevage semi-nomade, tandis que les seconds sont des agriculteurs sédentaires ayant leurs propres agglomérations. La région est alors très hétérogène sur le plan politique, puisque les rois de Babylone n'ont pas réussi à y rétablir leur autorité de façon durable, du fait d'une instabilité politique chronique qui mine les bases de leur pouvoir. La ville de Nippur, ainsi que les tribus chaldéennes voisines (Bit-Dakkuri et Bit-Amukkani étant les plus puissantes voisines de Nippur), jouissent donc d'une autonomie importante, voire d'une indépendance vis-à-vis du pouvoir central traditionnel de la Basse Mésopotamie.
Une série de 128 tablettes retrouvées dans la tombe d'un enfant où elles avaient été mises au rebut, donc dans un contexte secondaire. Elles ont été interprétées comme les archives de la personne dirigeant l'administration de Nippur au milieu du VIIIe siècle av. J.-C., Kudurru, probablement le gouverneur (šandabakku) de la ville, qui étend son autorité sur la campagne environnante, mais elles pourraient en fait émaner de plusieurs sources, dont des administrateurs mais aussi des personnes privées ayant des connexions avec les institutions. Kudurru correspond avec le roi de Babylone de l'époque, Nabonassar (747-734 av. J.-C.), en l'appelant « mon frère », ce qui signifie qu'il se considère comme son égal, et qu'il est indépendant, ou bien que Nabonassar n'est pas encore roi au moment des lettres. On trouve également dans ces textes des mentions de Mukin-zeri, un chef chaldéen, amené à monter sur le trône de Babylone après la période couverte par les archives, en 732 av. J.-C. Ces tablettes concernent surtout des activités économiques, de domaines agricoles mais aussi de commerce (de fer, de textiles), avec des relations tissées jusqu'en Assyrie ou en Élam. L'image qui ressort de la ville à cette période est celle d'une reprise économique évidente, alors que la cité conserve son rôle de ville sainte qui attire pèlerins et offrandes, notamment lors des grandes fêtes religieuses.

Entre Babylone et l'Assyrie
Depuis la fin du Xe siècle av. J.-C., les rois de Babylone sont rentrés dans une série de luttes contre le royaume dominant le nord de la Mésopotamie, l'Assyrie. Les offensives assyriennes dans le sud mésopotamien se font de plus en plus pressantes sous Teglath-Phalasar III et Sargon II dans la seconde moitié du VIIIe siècle av. J.-C., et impliquent finalement toutes les composantes politiques de la région, à commencer par les tribus chaldéennes qui deviennent des rivaux de plus en plus coriaces pour les Assyriens. Nippur oscille à cette période entre les factions pro- et anti-assyriennes, subissant plusieurs attaques. Au VIIe siècle av. J.-C., la domination assyrienne est devenue directe, et les gouverneurs de Nippur ont vu leur autonomie disparaître, car ils sont nommés directement par le pouvoir assyrien. Nippur bénéficie d'un privilège de franchise (zakūtu) dès le règne de Sargon II, mais subit une attaque sous son fils Sennachérib. Assarhaddon et Assurbanipal ont une politique plus active envers Nippur, dont ils restaurent des temples, celui d'Ishtar et celui d'Enlil, travaux documentés par des inscriptions sur cylindres d'argile et d'autres inscriptions courtes ; la ziggurat d'Enlil en particulier est reconstruite. La muraille de la ville est également renforcée. Des membres de l'administration assyrienne ainsi qu'une garnison semblent stationner dans la ville, dont les murailles sont renforcées. Cela n'empêche pas les gouverneurs de Nippur de se joindre à plusieurs reprises à des coalitions anti-assyriennes. Après la guerre civile entre Assurbanipal et son frère Shamash-shum-ukin, Nippur semble être restée sous administration directe de l'Assyrie (alors que le reste de la Babylonie est confiée à un souverain à la solde des Assyriens, Kandalanu), sans doute pour servir de principale base locale pour l'armée assyrienne.
Quand le chaldéen Nabopolassar se révolte contre les Assyriens en 626, Nippur ne semble néanmoins pas se rallier à lui, et devient le quartier général des Assyriens en Babylonie, ce qui en fait la cible d'attaques et d'au moins un siège prolongé. Le lot d'archives du dénommé Ninurta-uballit daté de cette période témoigne de ce moment de grandes difficultés, la ville subissant sans doute une disette, ce qui pousse plusieurs parents (neuf contrats sont connus) à vendre leurs enfants comme esclaves afin qu'ils survivent. Nippur ne passe probablement sous la coupe de Babylone que quand le royaume assyrien est détruit (entre 620 et 612), la dernière trace d'une domination assyrienne dans la ville datant des environs de 620, et la première trace d'une domination babylonienne en 607.

La période néo-babylonienne et la domination achéménide
Comme le reste de la Babylonie, Nippur et sa région passent successivement sous le contrôle des monarques de l'empire néo-babylonien (612-539 av. J.-C.), puis les souverains Perses achéménides (539-330 av. J.-C.). Cette période est documentée par plusieurs lots d'archives privées, en premier lieu celui de la famille des Murashu d'époque perse. Elles documentent en particulier les activités agricoles dans les campagnes environnant Nippur, qui semblent reposer plus qu'ailleurs sur la céréaliculture, la culture lucrative du palmier-dattier associée à des jardins, qui assure la prospérité des autres régions de Babylonie (autour de Babylone, Borsippa, Sippar et Uruk) semblant moins développée, ce qui semble indiquer que Nippur est moins prospère que ses voisines occidentales. Elle paye peut-être son statut d'ancienne tête de pont de l'Assyrie en Babylonie. Elle semble moins intégrée dans les réseaux d'échanges régionaux et internationaux, et laissée de côté par les programmes de reconstruction des grands sanctuaires entrepris par les rois néo-babyloniens. 
La population de la région de Nippur à cette période est encore plus marquée par la présence de populations ouest-sémitiques qu’auparavant. Les Araméens sont toujours un groupe numériquement important, dont la langue et l'écriture se diffusent constamment (on trouve des caractères araméens sur certaines tablettes), comme l'atteste la présence croissante de toponymes araméens dans l'arrière-pays de Nippur comme dans le reste de la Babylonie. Les tablettes de cette même période (Ve siècle av. J.-C.) montrent également la présence de populations juives, identifiées par certains noms comprenant une invocation du dieu Yahweh, par exemple Yigdal-Yaw (« Yahweh est grand »), donc des descendants des personnes venues dans la région lors de la déportation de Nabuchodonosor II, mais qui ne sont pas rentrées en Judée au début de la période du Second Temple.
L’économie locale est toujours marquée par la forte présence des temples. La documentation indique que la gestion de ceux-ci est sans doute centralisée dans l’administration d’un seul temple, le plus important, l'Ekur. C’est lui qui organise la distribution des denrées nécessaires au culte des différents temples de la ville, qui sont couramment fournies par des mêmes personnes travaillant avec différents sanctuaires, avec un statut de prébendier. Il est encore restauré par Nabuchodonosor II, et reste en activité sous les Achéménides et les Séleucides, avant d’être transformé en forteresse sous les Parthes (voir plus bas). Les temples les plus importants après l'Ekur sont toujours l’Eshumesha de Ninurta, l’Ebaragurdara d'Ishtar (sous l’épithète Šarrat-Nippuri, « Reine de Nippur »), et l'Eurusagga de Gula, parèdre de Ninurta (qui porte l’épithète Belēt-Nippuri, « Dame de Nippur », référence à la divinité du même nom des périodes précédentes, Nin-Nibru). Ce dernier a été identifié sur le tell ouest (zone WA) grâce aux niveaux archéologiques de cette période, dans lesquels on a retrouvé de nombreux dépôts votifs dédiés par des personnes à cette déesse, qui est une divinité guérisseuse. Nombre d’entre eux étaient des statuettes de chiens, l’animal symbolisant Gula. Un fragment d’un objet en lapis-lazuli portant une inscription votive mentionnant cette déesse confirma définitivement l’identification du temple. Il s’agit d’un bâtiment mesurant environ 100 × 40 mètres, de plan classique, dont seule une partie a été mise au jour.

Le lot d’archives le plus important de cette période date de la domination achéménide, durant la seconde moitié du Ve siècle av. J.-C. (règnes d’Artaxerxès Ier et de Darius II) : il s’agit des archives de la famille des descendants de Murashû, qui forment ce qui a pu être qualifié comme une « firme » familiale d’entrepreneurs. Ces plus de 700 tablettes retrouvées à la fin du XIXe siècle sur le tell ouest permettent de reconstituer l’organisation de l’administration de Nippur et sa région à cette période. Le pouvoir achéménide avait réorganisé l'attribution des terres agricoles pour ses besoins militaires, même s'il ne faut probablement pas considérer Nippur comme une sorte de « colonie militaire ». Cette situation témoigne surtout de l'emprise de la couronne sur l'économie agraire de la région. Des terres étaient classées en fonction du service militaire à pourvoir par les personnes auxquelles elles étaient attribuées : il y avait ainsi des « domaines d'arc » (bīt qašti), les plus petites et les plus courantes, des « domaines de chevaux » (bīt sisî) et enfin des « domaines de char » (bīt narkabti), les plus grandes. Les personnes responsables de ces terres étaient groupées dans des unités plus importantes appelées haṭru, placées sous la direction d'un officier (šaknu), et qui devaient former une troupe de combat. Si en temps de guerre ils devaient fournir des soldats avec leur équipement (payé grâce aux produits du domaine attribué), le service (ilku) des tenanciers consistait plus souvent en des taxes versées au pouvoir central, en argent ou en nature. La perception des revenus d’un nombre croissant de ces domaines fut concédée à des dignitaires de la famille royale perse ou à des nobles, bien que la propriété de la terre soit toujours théoriquement pour le roi. La politique achéménide étant de mettre en valeur de plus en plus de terres, il en résulta une chute du prix des terres agricoles sous l'effet d'une croissance de l'offre, tandis qu'à l'inverse les prix du matériel agricole connurent une forte croissance. Les possesseurs de domaines d'arc eurent de plus en plus de mal à les mettre en valeur eux-mêmes, et concédèrent leur gestion à des fermiers qui avaient plus de moyens.
Les descendants de Murashû (« Chat sauvage ») faisaient partie de ces derniers. Les deux premiers à diriger la « firme » sont les fils de Murashû, Enlil-khatin (de 454 à 437 av. J.-C.) et Enlil-shum-iddin (445-437 av. J.-C.). Leurs fils prirent la suite des affaires. Les membres de cette famille prenaient en charge de nombreux domaines d’arc, en s'acquittant en retour des taxes pesant sur elles et en reversant une redevance régulière à leurs détenteurs théoriques. Ils disposaient d’un matériel agricole important, avec des bêtes et des travailleurs, et purent ainsi mettre en valeur de nombreuses terres. À un certain moment, ils purent même louer au pouvoir royal la gestion de portions de canaux d'irrigation, collectant les taxes dues par les usagers de ceux-ci. Quand une guerre de succession survint après la mort d'Artaxerxès Ier, les détenteurs de terres militaires durent rendre un service effectif, ce dont ils n’avaient souvent pas les moyens. Certains empruntèrent donc de l’argent aux Murashû, donnant leurs terres en gage antichrétique. Les membres de la firme connurent alors une période faste, prenant en gage jusqu’à 70 terres par an. Les archives de la famille s’arrêtent brutalement vers 413, quand le pouvoir de Darius II est stable. Il semble que les Murashû aient payé leur fortune, et aient été stoppés par le pouvoir royal qui démantèle progressivement leur pouvoir économique.

Les résidences du Ier millénaire av. J.-C.
Parmi les secteurs fouillés pour cette période, la zone TA de Tablet Hill a livré plusieurs résidences du Ier millénaire av. J.-C., mais la chronologie absolue est assez mal établie en raison d'une mauvaise compréhension de la stratigraphie par les fouilleurs du site. La résidence la mieux connue est une petite maison d'environ 90 m² au niveau V (qui selon les fouilleurs correspondrait à la phase d'occupation assyrienne), la Maison C, organisée autour d'une cour centrale pavée de briques cuites, qui est ensuite agrandie aux dépens des bâtiments attenants (niveaux IV et III). Aux extrémités de la zone de fouilles ont été repérées deux résidences avec des pièces plus grandes, mais partiellement dégagées : la Maison B, au nord de la zone de fouilles (niveau III), puis la Maison A, à l'emplacement de la Maison C qui a disparu, organisée autour d'une grande cour pavée (7,90 × 8,60 m). 
Les constructions exhumées lors des campagnes postérieures dans la zone WC-2 ont été datées avec plus de certitudes des VIIe – VIe siècle av. J.-C. Il s'agit de deux bâtiments accolés, constitués là encore de plusieurs pièces organisées autour d'une cour centrale, qui connaissent plusieurs modifications entre les deux niveaux dégagés. Un troisième bâtiment, séparé du bloc des deux premières résidences par une rue étroite, était apparemment plus vaste mais n'a été dégagé que sur une petite partie. Il présente un profil plus original, avec des petites pièces et une cour pavée très vaste avec un puits, ainsi qu'une chapelle. Ses fouilleurs ont proposé de l'identifier comme un espace commercial avec des petites boutiques groupées autour d'une cour.

Périodes séleucide et parthe
De nombreuses ruines d'habitations ainsi que des trouvailles de monnaies dispersées sur tout le site montrent que Nippur est toujours une ville importante à la période hellénistique/séleucide (330-125 av. J.-C. en Basse Mésopotamie). Deux tablettes du règne de Démétrios Ier concernent des prébendes de boulanger dans l'Ekur, qui est alors dirigé par son intendant (šatammu) et également un collège (kiništu) comme cela est courant à cette période. Les sources cunéiformes de Nippur cessent après cela, ce qui empêche de connaître l'évolution des institutions de cette cité. De plus, les périodes postérieures aux époques néo-babylonienne et achéménide ont peu attiré l'attention des fouilleurs du site, donc ces phases qui sont paradoxalement celles durant laquelle le site de Nippur connaît sa plus grande extension sont très peu connues.
Le tell Ishan al-Sahra, situé au sud-est de Nippur, devient un point de peuplement important à cette période, et continue sa croissance aux suivantes. À l'époque parthe (125 av. J.-C.-224 ap. J.-C.), surtout durant les premiers siècles de notre ère, Nippur devient l'une des plus importantes villes de Basse Mésopotamie. Le temple d'Ishtar a été reconstruit complètement au même emplacement que précédemment. On entreprend d'abord d'établir une plate-forme servant de fondations, remplie en partie par des tablettes des périodes anciennes qui ont été mises au jour lors des fouilles.  Le sanctuaire est un vaste édifice rectangulaire d'environ 70 × 100 mètres, comprenant deux cellae parallèles. Cette dernière phase du temple conclut la remarquable continuité de cet édifice qui est attesté sur environ 3 500 ans, ce qui en fait la plus longue séquence connue pour un bâtiment mésopotamien. Le monument le plus important de cette période est la forteresse qui est élevée sur les ruines de la ziggurat de l'Ekur dans la seconde moitié du Ier siècle ap. J.-C., qui dans son dernier niveau (le III) comprend dans sa partie nord une vaste cour bordée par quatre iwans. La garnison parthe quitte peut-être Nippur vers 165 de notre ère, quand elle est appelée plus au Nord pour les conflits contre Rome. Par ailleurs, une cour à colonnes a été dégagée sur le tell ouest (zone WA).

Dernières phases
La croissance du site atteint son maximum à la période sassanide (224-651 ap. J.-C.), surtout sur le tell ouest où un sondage visant à préciser la stratigraphie des phases tardives d'occupation du site a été conduit (zone WG). Des canaux importants datant de cette époque ont été repérés. De cette période (aux Ve – VIIe siècle) datent notamment des bols en terre cuite portant des incantations en araméen carré, mandéen et syriaque, visant à repousser divers maux, notamment les actes de démons comme Lilith et Ishtar qui est devenue une démone avec le développement des religions monothéistes, et portent parfois des représentations des démons combattus. Ils semblent aussi bien relever des traditions de la communauté juive, que de celles des Mandéens, des Manichéens et de diverses communautés gnostiques, et présentent des affinités avec les pratiques magiques des périodes antérieures. Leur production semble cesser après la conquête islamique.
Nippur est toujours une cité peuplée aux débuts de la période islamique : pour le premier siècle de l'hégire, elle est évoquée par Tabari parmi les cités se révoltant contre le calife Ali en 659, et durant les troubles liées aux Kharidjites ; Yakut al-Rumi la situe sur le canal Nahr al-Nars creusé à l'époque sassanide (et non le Shatt al-Nil). Un trésor de pièces de monnaie d'époques sassanides et des débuts des Omeyyades a été mis au jour sur le tell, sans doute constitué au moment de la prise du pouvoir par les Abbassides. La ville est également mentionnée comme étant un évêché nestorien dans des chroniques du XIe - début XIIe siècle. Elle connaît alors un déclin marqué puis un abandon, à une époque indéterminée aux XIIIe – XIVe siècles. Un petit village existe plus à l'est (site M) durant la période des Ilkhanides (XIVe siècle apr. J.-C.), mais il n'a été exploré que superficiellement. Ce site est abandonné au début du XVe siècle apr. J.-C., et il n'y a plus d'habitat dans les alentours de Nippur avant la période des Ottomans, à partir du XVIe siècle apr. J.-C. Le fait que le nom actuel du site, Nuffar, dérive directement du nom antique indique néanmoins que son souvenir ne s'était pas perdu dans la toponymie.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Introductions
McGuire Gibson, « Nippur, grand centre religieux », Dossiers Histoire et Archéologie, no 103 « La Babylonie »,‎ mars 1986, p. 68-71
(en) Richard L. Zettler, « Nippur », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 4, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 148-152
Francis Joannès et Martin Sauvage, « Nippur », dans F. Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, 2001, p. 578-582
(en) Jacob Klein, « Nippur A. I. », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. IX (7/8), Berlin, De Gruyter, 2001, p. 532-539
(de) Marten Stol, « Nippur A. II. Altbabylonisch », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. IX (7/8), Berlin, De Gruyter, 2001, p. 539-544
(de) Michael P. Streck, « Nippur A. III. Seit der mittelbabylonischen Zeit », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. IX (7/8), Berlin, De Gruyter, 2001, p. 544-546
(en) McGuire Gibson, Donald P. Hansen et Richard L. Zettler, « Nippur B. Archäologisch », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. IX (7/8), Berlin, De Gruyter, 2001, p. 546-565

Études sur Nippur et sa région
(en) Robert McCormick Adams, Heartland of Cities : Surveys of Ancient Settlement and Land Use on the Central Floodplain of the Euphrates, Chicago, The Oriental Institute of Chicago, 1981, 300 p. (ISBN 0-253-20914-5)
(en) Maria de Jong Ellis (dir.), Nippur at the Centennial : Papers Read at the 35th Rencontre Assyriologigue Internationale, Philadelphia, 1988, Philadelphie, University of Pennsylvania Museum, 1992
(en) Steven Cole, Nippur in Late Assyrian Times, c. 755-512 B.C., Helsinki, Neo-Assyrian Text Corpus Project, coll. « State Archives of Assyria Series » (no 4), 1996

Annexes
Articles connexes
Enlil

Liens externes

Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste indicative du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative à la bande dessinée : Comic Vine 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

(en) « The Nippur Expedition », sur Oriental Institute de Chicago
(en) « Tell Nuffar (ancient: Nippur) », sur U.S. Department of Defense Legacy Resource Mangement Program (DoDLRMP)

 Portail de l’histoire   Portail de l'Antiquité   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’Irak   Portail de la Mésopotamie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
HATRA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:34:04


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,540
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hatra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hatra (; Arabic: الحَضْر (Arabic pronunciation: [al.ˈħadˀr]); Syriac: ܚܛܪܐ) was an ancient Arab  city in Upper Mesopotamia located in present-day eastern Nineveh Governorate in northern Iraq. The ruins of the city lie 290 km (180 mi) northwest of Baghdad and 110 km (68 mi) southwest of Mosul. It is considered the richest archaeological site from the Parthian Empire known to date.
Hatra was a strongly fortified caravan city and capital of the small Arab Kingdom of Hatra, located between the Roman and Parthian/Sasanian Empires. Hatra flourished in the 2nd century, and was destroyed and deserted in the 3rd century. Its ruins were discovered in the 19th century.

Name
Hatra is known as al-Ḥaḍr (الحضر) in Arabic. It is recorded as 𐣧𐣨𐣣𐣠 (ḥṭrʾ, vocalized as: Ḥaṭrāʾ) in Hatran Aramaic inscriptions, probably meaning "enclosure, hedge, fence". In Syriac, it is usually recorded in the plural form Ḥaṭrē. In Roman works, it is recorded as Greek Átra and Latin Hatra and Hatris.
The temple of Shamash, was officially called Beit ʾElāhāʾ 𐣡𐣩𐣵 𐣠𐣫𐣤𐣠‎ "House of God", in Hatran Aramaic inscriptions The city was recorded as "Enclosure of Shamash" (ḥtrʾ d-šmš 𐣧𐣨𐣣𐣠 𐣣𐣴𐣬𐣴‎) on a coin.

History
There is no archeological information on the city before the Parthian period but settlement in the area likely dates back to at least the Seleucid period. Hatra flourished under the Parthians, during the 1st and 2nd centuries AD, as a religious and trading center. Later on, the city became the capital of possibly the first Arab Kingdom in the chain of Arab cities running from Hatra, in the northeast, via Palmyra, Baalbek and Petra, in the southwest. The region controlled from Hatra was the Kingdom of Hatra, a semi-autonomous buffer kingdom on the western limits of the Parthian Empire, governed by Arabian princes.

Hatra became an important fortified frontier city and played an important role in the Second Parthian War, withstanding repeated attacks by the Roman Empire. During the 2nd century CE the city repulsed sieges by both Trajan (116/117) and Septimius Severus (198/199). Hatra's forces defeated the ascendant Sassanid Persians in 238 at the battle of Shahrazoor, but fell shortly after in 241 to the army of Sassanid king Shapur I and was destroyed. The traditional stories of the fall of Hatra tell of al-Nadirah, daughter of the King of Araba, who betrayed the city into the hands of Shapur as she fell in love with him. The story tells of how Shapur killed the king and married al-Nadirah, but later had her killed also after realizing her ingratitude towards her father.
Hatra was the best preserved and most informative example of ancient Arabian architecture. Its plan was circular, and was encircled by inner and outer walls nearly 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) in diameter and supported by more than 160 towers. A temenos (τέμενος) surrounded the principal sacred buildings in the city's centre. The temples covered some 1.2 hectares and were dominated by the Great Temple, an enormous structure with vaults and columns that once rose to 30 metres. The city was famed for its fusion of Greek, Mesopotamian, Canaanite, Aramean and Arabian pantheons, known in Aramaic as Beiṯ Ĕlāhā ("House of God"). The city had temples to Nergal (Assyrian-Babylonian and Akkadian), Hermes (Greek), Atargatis (Syro-Aramaean), Allat, Shamiyyah (Arabian), and Shamash (the Mesopotamian sun god). Other deities mentioned in the Hatran Aramaic inscriptions were the Aramaean Ba'al Shamayn, and the female deity known as Ashurbel, which was perhaps the assimilation of the two deities the Assyrian god Ashur and the Babylonian Bel—despite their being individually masculine.

List of rulers
In inscriptions found at Hatra, several rulers are mentioned. Other rulers are sporadically mentioned by classical authors. The earlier rulers are titled mrjʾ (māryā, "lord") and the later ones mlkʾ d-ʿrb ("king of the Arabs"; malkā, "king").

Art of Hatra
According to John M. Rosenfield, the statuary of Hatra belong to the Parthian cultural sphere, with numerous similarities in terms of clothing, decorative elements or posture, which tend to be massive and frontal, with feet often splayed. The architecture of Hatra itself is generally seen as an example of Parthian architecture. Similarities can be seen with the Art of the Kushans as well, due either to direct cultural exchanges between the area of Mesopotamia and the Kushan Empire at that time, or from a common Parthian artistic background leading to similar types of representation.

Modern Hatra
Hatra was used as the setting for the opening scene in the 1973 film The Exorcist, and since 1985 has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The site was first surveyed by Walter Andrae of the German excavation team working in Assur from 1906 to 1911. But systematic excavations have been undertaken only from 1951 by Iraqi archeologists. From the 1980s, the Italian Archaeological Expedition, directed by R. Ricciardi Venco (University of Turin), made major discoveries at Hatra. The excavations were focused on an important house ("Building A"), located close to the Temenos, and on deep soundings in the Temenos central area. Now the Expedition is active in different projects regarding the preservation and development of the archaeological site. In 1990, a Polish expedition of the Polish Centre of Mediterranean Archaeology University of Warsaw recorded and studied the city's defense walls.
In 2004, The Daily Telegraph stated "Hatra's finely preserved columns and statues make it one of the most impressive of Iraq's archaeological sites"

Restoration by Saddam Hussein
Saddam Hussein saw the site's Mesopotamian history as reflecting glory on himself, and sought to restore the site, and others in Ninevah, Nimrud, Ashur and Babylon, as a symbol of Arab achievement, spending more than US$80 million in the first phase of restoration of Babylon. Saddam Hussein demanded that new bricks in the restoration use his name (in imitation of Nebuchadnezzar) and parts of one restored Hatra temple have Saddam's name.

Partial destruction and looting by ISIL
Actions by the forces of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, which occupied the area in mid-2014, were a major threat to Hatra. In early 2015 they announced their intention to destroy many artifacts, claiming that such "graven images" were un-Islamic, encouraged shirk (or polytheism), and could not be permitted to exist, despite the preservation of the site for 1,400 years by various Islamic regimes. ISIL militants pledged to destroy the remaining artifacts.  Shortly thereafter, they released a video showing the destruction of some artifacts from Hatra. After the bulldozing of Nimrud on March 5, 2015, "Hatra of course will be next" said Abdulamir Hamdani, an Iraqi archaeologist from Stony Brook University. On March 7, Iraqi official sources reported ISIS had begun the demolishing the ruins of Hatra. A video released by ISIL during the next month showed the destruction of the monuments.
UNESCO and ISESCO issued a joint statement saying "With this latest act of barbarism against Hatra, (the IS group) shows the contempt in which it holds the history and heritage of Arab people."
The pro-Iraqi government Popular Mobilization Forces captured the city on 26 April 2017. A spokeswoman for the militias stated that ISIL had destroyed the sculptures and engraved images of the site, but its walls and towers were still standing though they contained holes and scratches received from ISIL bullets. PMF units also stated that the group had mined the site's eastern gates, thus temporarily preventing any assessment of damage by archaeologists. It was reported on 1 May that the site had suffered less damage than feared earlier. A journalist of EFE had earlier reported finding many destroyed statues, burnt buildings as well as signs of looting. Layla Salih, head of antiquities for Nineveh Governorate, stated that most of the buildings were intact and the destruction didn't compare with that of other archaeological sites of Iraq. A PMF commander also stated that the damage was relatively minor.

Gallery
Climate
Hatra has a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification BSh). Most rain falls in the winter. The average annual temperature in Hatra is 20.7 °C (69.3 °F). About 257 mm (10.12 in) of precipitation falls annually.

See also
Aramaic of Hatra
Destruction of cultural heritage by the Islamic State
Taq-i Kisra, sharing architectural features with structures at Hatra

References
Further reading
al-Salihi, W. (2021). "Hatra: Three Notes, Historical, Iconographical, and Religious". Iraq. 83: 3–12. doi:10.1017/irq.2021.12. S2CID 239871840.
Beyer, Klaus (1998). Die aramäischen Inschriften aus Assur, Hatra und dem übrigen Ostmesopotamien (datiert 44 v. Chr. bis 238 n. Chr.) [The Aramaic inscriptions from Assur, Hatra and the rest of Eastern Mesopotamia (dated 44 BC to 238 AD)]. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht, ISBN 3-525-53645-3.
Dirven, Lucinda (ed.) (2013). Hatra. Politics, Culture and Religion between Parthia and Rome. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, ISBN 978-3-515-10412-8.
Sommer, Michael (2003). Hatra. Geschichte und Kultur einer Karawanenstadt im römisch-parthischen Mesopotamien [Hatra. History and culture of a caravan city in Roman-Parthian Mesopotamia]. Mainz: Zabern, ISBN 3-8053-3252-1.
Vattioni, Francesco (1981). Le iscrizioni di Ḥatra [The inscriptions of Hatra]. Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale di Napoli.
Vattioni, Francesco (1994). Hatra. Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale di Napoli.

External links

Between Rome and Parthia: The Desert City of Hatra
bbc.co.uk Lost Kings of the Desert BBC Chronicle
Italian Archaeological Expedition at Hatra
Iraqi forces seize ancient UNESCO site of Hatra from Islamic State as jihadis execute Mosul civilians Archived 2018-01-04 at the Wayback Machine


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 5,825
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%85%D9%85%D9%84%D9%83%D8%A9_%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD%D8%B6%D8%B1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

مملكة الحضر أو مملكة عربايا (بالآرامية الحضرية: 𐣬𐣧𐣪𐣩𐣣𐣠 𐣫𐣠𐣬𐣥𐣬، وبالسريانية: ܡܠܟܘܬܐ ܕܚܕܪ) هي من أقدم الممالك العربيَّة في الجزيرة الفُراتيَّة ومكانها في السهل الشمال الغربي من وادي الرافدين الذي هو غرب العراق وشرق سوريا حالياً، حُدُود المملكة هي أسوار مدينة الحضر بفتح الحاء وسكون الضاد المعجمة والراء المهملة وتعني المكان المحضور الذي يمنع فيه تداول ما لايليق لموقعه المقدس. وهي مدينة لطيفة بين دجلة والزاب، مسافة 110 كيلومتراً جنوب غرب الموصل على نهر الثرثار. وتبعد عن مدينة آشور القديمة حوالي 70 كيلومتراً. ظهرت مملكة الحضر في المئة الثالثة الميلادية وحكمها أربعة ملوك استمر حكمهم قرابة المائة عام.
عرفت مملكة الحضر (مملكة عربايا) بعمائرها وفنونها وعساكرها وصناعاتها، كانت هذه المدينة تجاري رومة في العمران حيث وجد فيها حمامات ذات نظام تسخين متطور، وأبراج، ومحكمة، ونقوش منحوته، وفسيفساء، وعملات معدنية، وتماثيل، كما ضربوا النقود على الطريقة اليونانية والرومية، وجمعوا ثروات طائلة بسبب تجاراتها وأسواقها وقوافلها.
وجدت كتابة على أحد المباني تقول: «سنطروق هو ملك العرب»، وسنطروق يسمى في كتب الإخباريين بالساطرون وإسمهُ الضيزن. حاول الفرس والرومانيين غزوها مراراً وفشل إمبراطور الروم تراجان ومن بعده سيبتيموس سيفيروس سنة 199م بعد أن غزا كلاً من بابل وسلوقية وطيسفون لأن أهلها دافعوا عنها دفاعاً عنيداً، واستخدموا أقواساً مركبة ترمي سهمين بنفس الوقت وقتلوا بها بعضاً من حرس الإمبراطور، وهزموا جيش الملك أردشير الأول، الذي أخذ الجزيرة كلها حتى سقطت على يد الفرس عام 241 م ودمّرت تدميراً شديداً ومنع أهلها من حمل السلاح، وكانت تلك نهاية مملكة العرب.
يذكر أن الأشكانيين أخذوا صنائع وفنون وعادات الحضر. وهناك ممالك عربية كانت قائمة في إقليم الهلال الخصيب ومتقاربة في الزمن، أهمها: مملكة الأنباط - عاصمتها البتراء، ومملكة تدمر - عاصمتها تدمر، ودولة المناذرة - عاصمتها الحيرة، ودولة الغساسنة - عاصمتها الجابية.

مدينة الحضر التاريخية
مدينة الحضر مستديرة تقريباً، قطرها حوالي الكيلومترين يحيط بها خندق عميق محكم الجانب كما يحيطها سور مدعم بـ 163 برجاً، ويتكون هذا السور من جدارين عرض كل منهما 3م و 2.5م وبينهما مسافة 12م عند البوابة الشمالية. كما وجد خط ترابي يلف بالمدينة من جميع الجهات على بعد نصف كيلومتر خارج السور، ولا يعرف إن كان سوراً خارجياً أم أنه حلقة أحكم بها العدو حصاره للمدينة، وتقع على أطرافها عدد من القلاع. وقد تميزت المدينة بموقع يحتل أهمية تجارية وعسكرية، فضلاً عن وفرة مياهها العذبة وأراضيها الخصبة.

شعار المدينة هو النسر، وهو يمثل قوة وهيبة المدينة التي يحكمها آل نصر الأقوياء. اشتهرت الحضر في زمن جذيمة الوضاح الأبرش والذي اغتالته الزباء ملكة تدمر. وكان سكان الحضر وثنيون يعبدون آلهة منها اللات وشمش «الشمس» ثم تحولوا إلى الديانة المسيحية وغدت دولتهم دولة دينية تحكم بحكم ديمقراطي حيث يحق للكل إبداء رأيه.

صعود المدينة وسياقها الجغرافي والسياسي
يبدو أن مدينة الحضر ظهرت في القرن الأول الميلادي. لا توجد اكتشافات في الموقع أو أي مصدر مكتوب يُشير إلى أنها كانت موجودة من قبل، على الرغم من ذكر بلدة في نفس المنطقة في نص من القرن الثامن عشر قبل الميلاد؛ لها اسم مُشابه، هاشوارو (Haṣaru)، مبني على نفس الجذر السامي الذي يعني «السياج أو السور».
سيطر الفرثيون في وقت إنشاء الحضرعلى بلاد ما بين النهرين العليا من 120 إلى 110 قبل الميلاد. كان يسكنها أناس يتحدثون اللهجات الآراميَّة، وهم من نسل الآشوريين والآراميين من النصف الأول من الألفية الأولى قبل الميلاد، التي أشارت إليها نصوص ذلك الوقت عدة مرات بمصطلح «الآشوريون» أو «السوريون» بالإضافة إلى القبائل العربية التي استقّرت في المنطقة منذ منتصف الألفية الأولى للميلاد خاصة حول مدينة الحضر وفي منطقة الفرات الوسطى. كما أطلق المؤلفون اليونانيون والرومانيون على هذه المساحة اسم «شبه الجزيرة العربية».

موقع الحضر في منطقة يبدو أنها كانت غيرمأهولة في الماضي. تعتبر المنطقة صحراوية، لأنه يوجد مجرى مائي واحد وادي الثرثار وهو غير دائم. هذه المنطقة، الجزيرة السفلى، هي منطقة هضبة تقع عند حدود المنطقة حيث يمكن الزراعة الجافة؛ رصدت العديد من القرى والمزارع المعاصرة في محيطها، خاصة في الشمال حيث تكون الأمطار غزيرة، مما يشير إلى وجود نشاط ثقافي هناك. كانت هذه بلا شك مواقع موسمية يسكنها السكان شبه الرُحّل، حتى لو كانت بعض القرى بلا شك محتلة بشكل دائم من قبل مجتمعات المزارعين المستقرين.
من ناحية أخرى، كانت منطقة جنوب الحضر هي السائدة وكان هناك القليل من الموائل الثابتة. كانت هذه المنطقة حينها تشهد ممارسة السكان لحياة رعوية وهم شبه رحل وأولئك الذين يمارسون الزراعة الدائمة. كانت مدينة آشور، العاصمة القديمة لآشورهي المدينة الرئيسية في محيط مدينة الحضر، وتقع على بعد حوالي خمسين كيلومترًا إلى الغرب على نهر دجلة. كانت مركزًا مهمًا لعدة آلاف من السنين، شهدت عودة الازدهار في بداية الألفية الأولى. يبدو أن هذه المدينة قد خدمت، مثل الحضر، كمرساة للسلطة البارثية في الجزء الغربي من بلاد ما بين النهرين العليا.
عند نقاش أسباب تطور الحضر. غالبًا ما يتم طرح دور تجارة القوافل، حيث تقع المدينة على الطريق الذي يربط طسيفون، عاصمة البارثيين، بسوريا، ولا سيما تقاطع طريق نيسيبه؛ تَظهر الحضر على خريطة بوتينجر التي تُوضّح شبكة طُرق الإمبراطوريَّة الرومانيَّة كخطوة على هذا المحور. ولكن لا توجد في الواقع أية أدلة تُنادي بدور رئيسيّ للتجارة في حياة المدينة. التفسير الأكثر شيوعًا هو دورها كملاذ ديني يخدم السكان المستقرين والبدو في المنطقة، ويعبدون إله الشمس والآلهة العظيمة الأخرى في المدينة. لكن الواقع هو بلا شك أكثر تعقيدًا، فهناك العديد من العوامل التي يجب أن تلعبها، بما في ذلك تنمية المناطق النائية الزراعية التي لم تكن بالضرورة فقيرة كما يعتقد المرء عمومًا. · . كان للعامل السياسيّ دوره أيضًا. يبدو أن الحضر أكدت نفسها ككيان سياسي تابع للبارثيين، الذين سيطروا بعد ذلك على بلاد ما بين النهرين والهضبة الإيرانية. يتوافق ظهور مدينة الحضر في التاريخ مع التوسع الأقصى لمملكة حدياب (أربيل ونينوى وإكباتان وغوغميلا)، الواقعة شمال الحضر. وفقًا لخافيير تيكسدور، في القرن الأول، ربما سيطرت هذه المملكة أيضًا على مدينة الحضر. بالنسبة إلى تيكسدور، الذي يلخص الموقف المهيمن،

. غالبًا ما يُنظر إلى مملكة الحضر على أنها نوع من الدولة العازلة بين الإمبراطورية الرومانية والبارثيين، تتمتع بشبه استقلال: يبدو أن البارثيين لم يولوا اهتمامًا كبيرًا بشؤون أتباعهم. لم يحبطوا مشاريعهم وقدموا لهم دعمهم عند الحاجة. لكن العلاقات بين الحضر والبارثيين موثقة بشكل سيئ للغاية، وإعادة بنائها من قبل المؤرخين مبنية على فرضيات، معقولة ولكن لا يمكن إثباتها، ولا يوجد نص يستحضر علاوة على ذلك الهاتريان والبارثيين الذين يقاتلون جنبًا إلى جنب. وقد أدى هذا بلا شك إلى التقليل من الدور المناسب لملوك الحضر، التي يتم تقديم سياستها الخارجية بشكل عام من خلال منظور الازدواجية بين البارثيين والرومان.

بدايات التوسع
قام المؤلف الأول الذي ذكر وجود الحضر، كاسيوس ديو، بذلك ليذكر الحصار الفاشل للمدينة بقيادة الإمبراطور الروماني تراجان حيث عاد من حملة في بابل ضد البارثيين، وكان عليه أيضأ مواجهة تمرد من البلدان التي تركها وراءه بعد الجزء الأول من الحملة (التي بدأت عام 114). يستحضر المؤرخ مدينة ليست غنية ولا مزدهرة، والتي لم يكن لديها الحجم الذي كانت ستأخذه في السنوات التالية. ومع ذلك، كان سكانها قادرين على مقاومة المحاصرين بقوة. كان من الممكن أن يفشل الحصار لأن القوات الرومانية، التي اختبرها المناخ الصحراوي وقادها إمبراطور في تدهور صحته (كان من المقرر أن يموت بعد فترة وجيزة)، كانت تفتقر إلى الماء والعشب لحمله إلى نهايته:

يبدو أن ازدهار مدينة الحضر بدأ بعد انسحاب القوات الرومانية. على أي حال، في هذا الوقت، يعود أقدم نقش تم العثور عليه في الموقع، والذي يمكن تأريخه على وجه اليقين، والذي يتعلق ببناء غرفة في الحرم الرئيسي للمدينة. ثم قادها شخصية تدعى ورود Worod، تحمل في النقوش لقب «اللورد» (māryā)، والتي ربما كانت في المنصب بالفعل أثناء حصار تراجان. يظهر في نقوش اثنين من أمراء الحضر، الكود ومعاني، لكن لم يُعرف متى حكموا.

عصر «ملوك العرب»
هناك نقش مؤرخ في 134 يشير إلى اللورد الذي حكم المدينة آنذاك، نشريحب، وابنه الأكبر نصري، الذي يبدو أنه ارتبط بممارسة السلطة. أصبح هذا الأخير بدوره سيدًا في السنوات التي تلت ذلك. تميّز هذان العهدان بنشاط إنشائي مكثف: شُيِّد سور الحرم العظيم في عام 138 بمبادرة من نصر، في ذلك الوقت ولي العهد، ثم على الأقل في بداية عام 150 عامًا. محيط خارجي كبير للمدينة يرتفع عن الأرض، مما يوسع إلى حد كبير المساحة التي تغطيها المدينة؛ لم يتم تحديد مسار الجدران السابقة من قبل علماء الآثار. العديد من المعابد مؤرخة أيضا من عهده. على النقوش التي تخلد ذكرى هذه الأعمال، قدم نصري نفسه أيضًا على أنه «رئيس كهنة إله الشمس» (أفكالا ربّ شمش)، مما يشير إلى أن منصبه كان له أيضًا جانب ديني. وساعده في أداء مهامه أحد الوجهاء يُدعى رَبِيتة، «خادم البيت (الإله)». كان له بلا شك وظيفة دينية بالدرجة الأولى لأنه كان مسؤول عن نشر المراسيم القانونية للمدينة، التي يُنسب أصلها إلى الآلهة.
خليفة نصري هو ابنه ولجش، اسم من أصل بارثي حمله العديد من حكام هذه الإمبراطورية)، والذي كان أول من حمل لقب «ملك العرب» (malka di Arab)، والذي يبدو أنه يكشف عن بسط سلطة أمراء الحضر على المناطق المجاورة. ثم زودت تماثيل الملوك بتاج متوج يميز ملوك الحضر التابعين. نحن لا نعرف بالضبط تحت أي ظروف حدث هذا التطور. قد يكون من الضروري ربطه بالأحداث التي نجمت عن النزاعات بين البارثيين والرومان: في السنوات 161-165، بعد عدة حروب، خسر الملك البارثي فولوغيس الرابع الوادي الأوسط من نهر الفرات لصالح خصومه، التي سلبته السيادة على مملكة الرها (أو أسروين). كان بإمكانه حينئذٍ أن يسعى إلى زيادة قوة أتباعه في الحضر لتقوية مكانتهم في نظامه الدفاعي، من خلال رفعهم إلى الكرامة الملكية ومنحهم السلطة على السكان المجاورين. لكن في غياب وثيقة صريحة حول هذه النقطة، يظل هذا تخمينيًا. ربما لم يحكم ولوعاش لفترة طويلة، منذ أن خلفه شقيقه سنطروق الأول على أبعد تقدير في عام 177. حكم السناتريك لبضع سنوات، وربط ابنه عبدسميا بالعمل التجاري، ومنحه لقب «ولي العهد» (pašgrībā)، قبل أن يخلفه على أبعد تقدير في عام 193. وفي هذا التاريخ، ظهر بالفعل في نص كتبه المؤرخ هيروديان، تحت اسم بارسمياس، في سياق الحرب الأهلية التي كانت تجري في الإمبراطورية الرومانية: أرسل فرقة من الرماة، بناءً على طلب الملك البارثي فولوجيز الخامس، إلى المندوب الروماني سوريا، بيسكينيوس النيجر، الذي ادعى لقب إمبراطور. هزم سبتيموس سيفيروس الأخير أخيرًا، وردا على ذلك، حاصر الحضر مرتين في التسعينيات، وعانى من إخفاقين أمام الأسوار الصلبة للمدينة. كان أكثر نجاحًا في مناطق غرب الحضر، حيث شكل فيلقًا مواجهًا للمدينة مباشرة.
يبدو أن العلاقات بين الحضر والبارثيين كانت بعيدة إلى حد ما. يستحضر هيروديان (III.28) حقيقة أن الملك البارثي «(رأى نفسه) غريبًا تمامًا عن القتال الدائر بين سيفيروس وهاتريين، ولم (يأخذ) أي ظل لهذه الحرب». بمرور الوقت، يبدو التأثير البارثي أقل وضوحًا في المنطقة وملوك الحضر أكثر استقلالية. يفسر السياق العسكري بلا شك سبب قيام ابن عبد السميع، سناطريق الثاني، بتعزيز أسوار المدينة في عام 200، عندما كان لا يزال ولي العهد فقط. حكم في العقود الأولى من القرن الثالث، وربط ابنه عبد السميع (الثاني) بالسلطة، لكن لا يُعرف ما إذا كان هذا الأخير قد خلفه.

سقوط المدينة وأسطورتها
أدى سقوط الإمبراطورية الفرثية ضد الفرس بقيادة أردشير، مؤسس السلالة الساسانية عام 223، إلى تغيير الجغرافيا السياسية لبلاد ما بين النهرين والشرق الأوسط بأكمله. استغرق الأمر بضع سنوات للقوات الفارسية للقضاء على آخر ملوك بارثيين وإخضاع أتباعه الرئيسيين على الهضبة الإيرانية. ثم تحول أردشير إلى الغرب، ضد الرومان، الذين كان سنطروق الثاني قد ناشدهم لتجنب مشاركة مصير الخدم الآخرين للبارثيين. نقش عثر عليه في الحضر يعود تاريخه إلى 235 يشير إلى أن جماعة رومانية كانت تتمركز هناك. لذلك من الممكن أن تكون الحضر في ذلك الوقت حليفة وحتى عميل للرومان، أو حتى أنها شهدت توسعًا جديدًا في سلطتها، نحو الغرب، على القبائل العربية التابعة بالفعل لروما من قبل.
على أي حال، عانت المدينة من حصار الفرس بقيادة شابور الأول بن أردشير في السنوات التالية. تم أخذها أخيرًا في 240، في ظل ظروف لم يتم تحديدها. يوثق علم الآثار قبل كل شيء الأعمال المرتبطة بالحصار النهائي للساسانيين، الذين تولى بناء جدران الالتفاف والمعادلة المرتبطة بمخيمهم، ولا شك أنه سيتم البحث عنها في شرق المدينة. من الواضح أن سكان المدينة قد تم ترحيلهم بالكامل، وفقًا لعادات المنتصرين. لم يتم إعادة إسكان المدينة أبدًا لأنه لم يتم العثور على أي أثر للاحتلال بعد الحصار. عندما مر بالمنطقة عام 363، عقب عودة حملة الإمبراطور يوليان المرتد الكارثية ضد الساسانيين، وصف المؤرخ أميانوس مارسيليانوس مدينة الحضر بأنها

ذُكِرَ سقوط الحضر في التقاليد الإيرانية والعربية اللاحقة، فظهرت قصائد رثائية حول موضوع القوة المدمرة . ولا يزال الحدث بحد ذاته ضعيف المعلومات، لأنه غالبًا ما كان يؤرخ بشكل سيئ، من ذلك ما رواه فردوس الذي وضعه تحت حكم سابور الثاني في القرن الرابع. فقد تتبع روايات سقوط الحضر التي رواها مؤلفون مختلفون، وكذلك المؤرخ الطبري (القرن العاشر). وكان يقال أن ملك الحضر قد استفز الملك الساساني سابور الأول بمهاجمة أراضيه، وأسر شقيقته.
وكان هذا الأخير سيشن هجومًا ضده ويحاصر مدينته دون نجاح لعدة أشهر. ذُكرت عدة روايات لسقوط المدينة غالبيتها تلقي اللوم على الأميرة نادرة أو (نظيرة) ابنة ملك الحضرالضيزن إذ بعدما حاصر سابور المدينة أشرفت عليه النضيرة، بنت الضيزن وهويته فكتب في سهم يدل على عورة الحصن، فأتتها من مدخل الماء ورمت بالسهم إليه، فقطع الماء عنهم حتى أجهدهم العطش، ثم استندبهم على حكمه وقتل النضيرة. وذُكر أن ابنة الضيزن مليكة وليست نادرةامها عمة سابور دختوش ابنة نرسي كان الضيزن قد سباها عندما غزا طيسفون وأن دخول المدينة كان بإعاز منها لسابور أن يأتي رجاله من الثرثار وفيه فجوة تؤدي الى الحصن، وقيل أنها اسكرت أباها ليوافق على الزواج بدلا من أن يرفضه ويورد الحميري أن إسقاء الملك الخمر كان لغرض سرقة مفاتيح الحصن، أما ماورد في رواية أنها كانت ستوضّح لشابور طقوسًا سحرية تجعل من الممكن جعل التعويذة التي تحمي جدران المدينة التي لا يمكن اختراقها غير فعالة، وإلا لكانت قد سمّمت والدها وسلمت مفاتيح المدينة إلى سابور، أو حتى قيل للأخير كيف يدخل المدينة عن طريق النهر. بمجرد الاستيلاء على المدينة، وفى سابور الأول بوعده بالزواج، ثم أدرك ليلة الزفاف أن جلد الأميرة كان رقيقًا للغاية عند رؤيتها تنزف بعد ملامستها لورقة الآس. طلب تفسيرا، وأخبرته الأميرة أن ذلك بفضل العلاجات التي أغدقت على بشرتها بفضل والدها، المليء بالاهتمام تجاهها. لقد شعر بالفضيحة من حقيقة أن زوجته الجديدة كان من الممكن أن تخون مثل هذا الأب المحب وخوفًا من أن تفعل الشيء نفسه معه، فقد أعدمها. وفقًا للبعض، هذه القصة هي سلف بعيد لقصة الأميرة وحبة البازلاء، التي روج لها هانز كريستيان أندرسن. يجدر الإشارة الى أنه لم يرد أي نص في الحضر يذكر الضيزن أو النضيرة المثبت أن الحضر سقطت بعد حصار مرير استمر عاماً كاملاً من مطلع نيسان 240 إلى نيسان 241م.

العمارة والعمران
في حالتها النهائية، من منتصف القرن الثاني، كانت الحضر مدينة ذات مخطط دائري تقريبًا، وفقًا لنموذج تخطيط المدن الذي يبدو أنه كان شائعًا في بلاد ما بين النهرين البارثيين منذ العثور عليها في أربيل (حدياب القديمة وحاليًا في أربيل) وطيسفون.

يوجد في وسطها معبد كبير مخصص لشمش إله الشمس، النصب الحجري الوحيد في مدينة مصنوع بالكامل من الطوب اللبن. يمكن القول إن هذا الضريح، الذي تضمن عدة معابد في نهاية ساحة واسعة، كان موقعًا للحج السنوي لعرب بلاد ما بين النهرين. تم بناء النسيج العمراني بشكل تدريجي بدون مخطط رئيسي في جميع الاتجاهات حول هذا الحرم المركزي. كان محميًا بجدار مزدوج من الطوب الخام. لا يزال التطور التاريخي للموقع غير معروف بشكل جيد خارج القرن الأخير من وجوده، ومن الصعب معرفة أي الآثار هي الأقدم، وما هو الجانب الذي كانت للمدينة قبل الأعمال الكبرى في القرن الثاني التي رافقت التطور الحقيقي للحضر.

السور
عثرت فرق التنقيب الإيطالية والبولندية بالقرب من السياج المقدس على آثار لجدران من الحجر والطوب اللبن، قبل إنشاءات أخرى في الموقع. يبدو أن هذه هي بقايا سور كان يحيط بالحضر قبل بناء السور الأحدث وأكثرها وضوحًا خلال الحفريات، تلك التي بنيت في عهد نصرو في منتصف القرن الثاني. لذلك، فإن هذا السور الأول هو الذي واجهته قوات تراجان، قبل الصعود الحقيقي للحضر الذي شهد تشييد جدار أكثر قوة يشمل مساحة أكبر بالإضافة إلى السياج المقدس. لا يمكن تحديد المساحة التي يحدها هذا الجدار الأول على وجه اليقين لأن مساره لم يتم تحديده بوضوح بعد.

السور الرئيسي في الحضر، الذي يمتد لمسافة 6 كيلومترات، معروف جيدًا بفضل الحفريات التي كان موضوعها. كان يسبقه خندق مائي ومحدود بمساحة دائرية تقريبًا. كان عملاً من الطوب اللبن والطين، يرتكز على قاعدة حجرية يبلغ ارتفاعها حوالي متر واحد وعرضها 3.50 مترًا، وأكثر في بعض الأماكن التي تم تعزيزها فيها بعد حصار الجيوش الرومانية. قُدِّر ارتفاعه الأصلي بنحو عشرة أمتار. يجب أن يكون الجزء العلوي من السور ملونًا، بناءً على العديد من اللوحات المزججة المزرقة التي تم اكتشافها. كانت الأبراج التي تفصل بينها حوالي ثلاثين متراً دافعت عن الجدار وأضيفت حصون حجرية إلى الجهاز لدعم المقاليع أثناء الحصار. قرب نهاية وجود المدينة، تضاعف الجدار الرئيسي بجدار داخلي صغير يعمل كخط دفاع ثانٍ. يمكن عبور السور من خلال أربعة بوابات تقع عند النقاط الأساسية الأربعة، بما في ذلك منعطف صناعي عند المدخل والفناء الداخلي. لذلك كان هذا الجهاز المهيب قادرًا على مقاومة حصار الجيوش الرومانية، وإبقاء الفرس تحت السيطرة لمدة عامين. أقام الأخير أمامه سورًا يحيط بالمدينة بأكملها، وهو التفاف حدده علماء الآثار، ويوضح أهمية الجهود التي كان عليهم بذلها لإنهاء الحصار

آثار السور المقدسة
تضمن السور المقدس، الذي حدد مساحة مستطيلة تبلغ 320 × 435 مترًا، المعالم الرئيسية في الحضر، المبنية من الحجر الحر، والتي كانت موضوع إعادة بناء مهمة (تجميع (ترميم)) من قبل علماء الآثار العراقيين. تم تشييد السور الذي يفصل هذه المجموعة عن باقي المدينة في عهد نصرو عام 138. وقد اخترقت الأبواب من جوانبه الأربعة. تم تقسيم هذا السياج الداخلي إلى قسمين بواسطة جدار عرضي عازل، إلى الشرق، ساحة واسعة ذات مخطط مربع تقريبًا وخالية تقريبًا من الإنشاءات، وتقع المباني الرئيسية في الجزء الغربي من السياج المقدس، على طول الجدار. في مساحة 320 × 140 مترًا) التي تم تحديدها. كانت بعض الغرف بمثابة مخازن وكذلك أروقة كانت موجودة في أقسام داخلية معينة من العلبة المقدسة. تم فتح المدخل الرئيسي لهذا على ساحة من جانبه الشرقي، وشمل ثلاثة بوابات مؤطرة بأربعة أبراج. لم يكن المدخل موجودًا في وسط الجدار الذي تم ثقبه فيه، ولكنه كان غريب الأطوار قليلاً باتجاه الشمال، ليواجه، على الجانب الآخر من المتنزه، المعبدان اللذان يفترض أنهما الأقدم .
تم ترتيب العديد من الأضرحة على الجانب الغربي من الباحة، بالقرب من الجدار الداخلي أو المجاور له. احتل «المعبد الهلنستي» الموقع المركزي، وهو اسم يرجع إلى الحفارين في الموقع (المصطلح غير مناسب تمامًا لأن الإلهام المعماري بشكل أساسي روماني)، ويسمى أيضًا «معبد ماران»، وهو الألوهية الرئيسية للمدينة. في الواقع، لا يُعرف على وجه اليقين أي الآلهة كانت تُعبد في هذا الهيكل؛ كما أنه من غير المعروف ما إذا كان هناك واحد أو أكثر. تميز مظهره بشكل كبير بالتأثير اليوناني والروماني، حتى لو كان تصميمه أصليًا: مستطيل الشكل، يحده صف مزدوج من الأعمدة، تم تشييد الصف الثاني على الأرض. نفس شرفة المعبد نفسه، وفقًا لمبدأ معابد المنصة من النوع الروماني. كان للواجهة، التي ترتكز أعمدتها على المنصة، قاعدة أرشيفية تميز العمارة السورية للإلهام اليوناني الروماني. · .
تضمنت الساحة الشرقية أيضًا مبانٍ مهمة أخرى تقع جميعها على جانبها الغربي. إلى الشمال، بُني على الجدار المستعرض، كان هناك معبد بواجهته ثلاثة إيوانات، غرف كبيرة مقببة مثقوبة على جانب واحد من الشرفة على شكل قوس كبير، وهو سمة من سمات العمارة في الفترة البارثية، وتوجد في العديد من المباني في الحضر. شُيِّد هذا المبنى في عهد سنطروق الأول وكرس للإلهة اللآت، ممثلة في العديد من النقوش البارزة. في الركن الجنوبي الغربي من المتنزه وفي وسطه، كان هناك مذبحان مكشوفان، غير معروف الاستخدام.
على مستوى المعبد المعروف باسم ماران، سمحت بوابتان مقنطتان بالوصول، في الجزء الغربي من السياج المقدس، إلى المعبد الأول، المعروف باسم شاهيرو، الذي بني على نفس مستوى المعبد السابق؛ لا شك في أن الجدار الذي يفصل بينهما قد أقيم بعد المعبدين اللذين ربما يكونان الأقدم في الموقع. يشتمل مدخل هذا المعبد الثاني، المواجه للجنوب، على رواق بأربعة أعمدة وباب مقوس نصف دائري يفتح على السيلا، على طراز إيوان  · .
تم عبور الجزء الغربي من السياج المقدس نفسه بجدار عرضي، يمر عبر النصب الأكبر للحضر، الواقع في وسط هذا الجزء من السياج المقدس. كان نصبًا ضخمًا يبلغ طوله 115 مترًا، ويتألف من ثمانية صفوف من الأقواس، بما في ذلك إيوانان أعلى من الآخر، بارتفاع يزيد عن 25 مترًا ويفتحان على غرفتين مقببتين بمساحة 34 قدمًا 15 مترًا (إيوان جنوبي وإيوان مركزي) انا فزت). كان هذان البابان الكبيران يحدهما أعمدة طويلة متداخلة مع تيجان كورنثية، تفصلهما عن صفين من الإيوانات الأصغر، وتلك التي تعلوها كانت مغلقة بجدار. انفتح الإيوان الجنوبي الكبير على صرح مربّع كبير تبلغ مساحته 28 متراً مربعاً، وربما يكون إضافة متأخرة، مؤلفة من غرفة مركزية مربعة مقبّبة، يحيط بها رواق مقنطر بدوره. يوجد إيوانان متوسطان الحجم في الجزء الشمالي من المبنى ويفتحان على نفس الغرفة المستعرضة المقببة؛ ربما تم بناؤها في وقت متأخر عن بقية البناء. اختفى سقف المبنى، ولكن تم العثور على بلاطاته المزججة الزرقاء أثناء أعمال التنقيب على الأرض. يبدو أن الغرفة المقببة المربعة الواقعة خلف الإيوان الجنوبي الكبير كانت مكان العبادة الرئيسي لإله الشمس، حيث تم استخدام الممر الذي يحدها من جوانبها الأربعة في طقوس الطواف. كان من المقرر أن تكون الغرف التي فتحت لها الأبواب المقوسة الأصغر حجرات مجاورة للمحراب. من ناحية أخرى، يبدو أن الإيوان الكبير كان عبارة عن أماكن للاجتماعات كانت تستخدم لاستقبال العديد من الضيوف، كما يتضح من المقاعد التي كانت على حواف الإيوان الكبيرين في المجمع الرئيسي. بالمعنى الدقيق للكلمة، لم تكن بالضرورة ملاذات، على الأقل ليس بالمعنى الكلاسيكي للمصطلح، مثل "قدس الأقداس"، على الرغم من أنها تبدو وكأنها رتبت مذابح على المنصات هناك. كانت مناسبات الاجتماعات أن تكون مهرجانات دينية تتميز بالتضحيات والمآدب الطقسية التي تشهد بوفرة في الديانات السامية في ذلك الوقت. كانت هذه لحظات مهمة في الحياة السياسية والدينية للمدينة، حيث استقبل أمراء الحضر، وكبار كهنة إله الشمس، ممثلين عن قبائل منطقتهم، وبالتالي أكدوا دورهم "ملك الحضر". العرب ".
يوجد مزاران آخران في النصف الجنوبي من الجزء الغربي من الحرم المقدس: «معبد سامية» و«معبد الثالوث». كلاهما يشتمل على ثلاثة إيوانات مصطفة على نفس الواجهة، والواجهة المركزية أكبر، وتعيد إنتاج نموذج المعبد الرئيسي بحجم أصغر.

الإنشاءات الأخرى
تشكل الفراغ بين الجدار والسور المقدس المنطقة السكنية لمدينة الحضر. تظهر الصور الجوية للموقع أنه تم تشييده على معظم مساحته، وأن تصميم الطرق الرئيسية، العريضة، كان لا يزال واضحًا على الأرض في وقت الحفريات، وكذلك الطرق الثانوية الأخرى. أضيق مع تخطيط غير منتظم أكثر. ولكن كما هو الحال في كثير من الأحيان مع المدن القديمة، فإن هذه المنطقة الخالية من الآثار الكبرى لم تجذب انتباه علماء الآثار حتى وقت متأخر، وبالتالي فهي أقل شهرة من المجمع الضخم.
ومع ذلك، فقد رصدت فرق من علماء الآثار العراقيين عدة مبانٍ في هذه المنطقة، بما في ذلك أربعة عشر معبدًا داخل المدن، أسستها عائلات ثرية من المدينة. كانت مبانٍ ذات مخطط بسيط، بما في ذلك غرفة واسعة مستطيلة الشكل تحدها مقاعد وتفتح على غرفة صغيرة أو مكان بسيط يتضمن صورة الألوهية المبجلة في المكان بالإضافة إلى المذبح. لم يكن لديهم بشكل عام أي غرف ملحقة. كان مدخل المعبد إيوانًا، أما معابد الحرم المقدّس  · .
من جانبها كشفت الفرق الإيطالية مناطق سكنية. المساكن الخمسة عشر التي تم استكشافها هي من تقاليد بلاد ما بين النهرين، وتتميز بتنظيم حول فناء داخلي مع إيوان يعمل كمنطقة استقبال. منزل معنو، بالقرب من المعبد الأول، هو الأكبر في الموقع (2700 متر مربع). كان يحتوي على عدة وحدات، يتم تنظيم الوحدة الرئيسية حول فناء به إيوانان متقابلان ورواق. وشملت الوحدات الأخرى نوعًا من الأجنحة مع مناطق الاستقبال الخاصة بها، بالإضافة إلى المتاجر أو الورش. كما قامت نفس الفرق بتطهير جزء كامل من حي يمر عبر الشارع المتجه من شمال السياج المقدس إلى البوابة الشمالية لجدار المدينة. تضمنت العديد من المباني والمساكن والمصليات والمتاجر التي فتحت على الشارع بأروقة. أكبر سكن بدون عوائق في هذه المنطقة، «المبنى A»، يغطي أكثر من 1.850 متر مربع. تم تنظيمه حول فناء مركزي في إيوان، وزينت بعض جدرانه بالرسومات أو الكتابة على الجدران؛ تشير النقوش إلى أنه كان مقر إقامة رئيس كهنة شاهيرو  ·  · . بالقرب من البوابة الشمالية للجدار، تم أيضًا رصد مبنى فخم يضم فناءً كبيرًا مساحته حوالي 47 × 50 مترًا، إيوانان، لم يكن أبدًا موضع حفريات منهجية. كما تم استكشاف المقابر في الموقع (تم رصد حوالي 142)، خاصة داخل المدينة، معزولة أو مجمعة معًا في مقابر. هذه مبانٍ صغيرة مربعة الزوايا، من 6 إلى 11 مترًا على الأرض، مبنية من الحجر وفي بعض الأحيان لها زخرفة خارجية، وشبه أعمدة مشغولة. يمكن أن تتكون من غرفة واحدة، أو مقسمة إلى وحدتين أو ثلاث وحدات تتكون نفسها من غرفة واحدة أو أكثر، دون معرفة ما تعكسه هذه الاختلافات (التنوع الثقافي أو التغييرات بمرور الوقت؟).

حضارة الحضر
جاء ازدهار المدينة بشكل رئيسي من استغلال الواحات التي دعمتها، وكذلك من التربية الواسعة التي مارسها البدو. لا شك أنها مارست أيضًا تجارة القوافل، فقد لعبت دوراً في الوساطة التجارية بين آسيا وأوربا.
لكن أحدًا لم يجد في الحضر نقوشًا للقوافل كما في تدمر، المدينة التي تشبهها كثيرًا في أماكن أخرى.

النقوش واللغات والنصوص
تضمنت الآثار والأعمال الفنية في الحضر نقوشًا محفورة أو محفورة أو مرسومة على كتل حجرية ونقوش وركائز تماثيل. تم التعرف على حوالي 500 في الموقع، ويعود تاريخهم إلى القرن الثاني تقريبًا؛ يمكن تأريخ 26 فقط بدقة لأنهم أشاروا إلى السنوات في الحساب السلوقي.

هذه النصوص مكتوبة بالأبجدية الآرامية، اللغة السائدة في شمال بلاد ما بين النهرين منذ نهاية الإمبراطورية الآشورية، في القرن السابع قبل الميلاد. وهي على وجه التحديد نسخة شرقية من الآرامية، وجدت أخرى منها، لنفس الفترة، في المواقع المجاورة آشور وقبر أبو نايف وفي منطقة تكريت الواقعة جنوبًا. كما أن تهجئتهم قريب جدًا من النقوش من مواقع في أرمينيا (غارني). النقوش الآتية من سوريا، وخاصة تلك الموجودة في تدمر والسريانية، هي جزء من تقليد غربي مختلف. تتكون أبجدية الحضر من 22 حرفًا، وهي ثابتة في نوعها، وتقرأ من اليمين إلى اليسار، مثل معظم الأبجديات السامية الأخرى. ·  تعتبر النقوش حذرة إلى حد ما: تلك من النوع «الضخم»، الأقل عددًا والتي تنبثق من أعلى سلطات المدينة، هي الأفضل من حيث التنفيذ، في حين أن تلك من النوع المخطوطة أو «الأثرية الزائفة» الأكثر شيوعًا، هي أقل من ذالك. حفنة من النقوش باللغة اللاتينية تعود إلى الفترة الأخيرة من الحضر، عندما كانت تضم حامية رومانية. من وجهة نظر نمطية،

(ر. برتولينو). النصوص التذكارية هي الأكثر عددًا. هذه المجموعة، المكونة من نقوش مختصرة، هي في الأساس من النوع الديني، وبالتالي فهي تُعلم في المقام الأول بانثيون الحضر وبعض القوانين الدينية. بشكل غير مباشر، يمكن دراسة أسماء الأشخاص وفقًا لهذه النصوص، مما يؤكد الطابع التعددي للحضارة المحلية (الآرامية والعربية والإيرانية)؛ هناك أيضًا ألقاب رسمية وأسماء بعض القبائل بالإضافة إلى سلاسل النسب التي تسمح بالتعرف على عائلات معينة. من ناحية أخرى، لا تساعد هذه النقوش كثيرًا في إعادة بناء التاريخ السياسي للمدينة.

الديانة
ديانة الحضر التي عرفت بدراسة نقوش الموقع وبفضل فنها وهندستها المعمارية لها أصول مختلفة (بلاد ما بين النهرين، سورية، عربية، يونانية رومانية، إيرانية).
الإله الرئيسي للحضر هو إله الشمس، شمش في النقوش (حرفيًا «الشمس»)، شمش في ديانة بلاد ما بين النهرين القديمة. تعرضها العملات المعدنية في المدينة باسم «حضر شمش» (ḥtrʾ d-šmš)، أي «العلبة (المقدسة) للشمس». ربما كان هذا الإله هو الألوهية الرئيسية للمجمع الضخم المسيطر على العلبة المقدسة.

تصر نقوش الحضر بشكل خاص على العبادة المكرسة لثلاثية مكونة من مارين (مرن) «ربنا» ومارتن (مرتن) «سيدتنا» وبار مارين (بر مرجان) «ابن ربنا». يتكون هذا الثالوث من زوجين وابنهما غير معروف في مكان آخر، وبالتالي يشكل أصالة من الحضر. يبقى السؤال حول معرفة ما إذا كان يجب تحديد «ربنا» على أنه لقب لشماش مفتوحًا: يبدو أن بعض النقوش تشير إلى نعم، ويبدو أن البعض الآخر يميزها على العكس من ذلك. يبدو أن الإله إيجل (نشري، نيشرا)، الذي تتحدث عنه بعض النقوش، مرتبط بمارين والمكتب الملكي. الآلهة الأخرى التي تشهد عليها النقوش معروفة جيدًا في أماكن أخرى، لا سيما في تدمر، ولها أصول مختلفة. أحد المعابد المهمة في المدينة، الذي أقيم في عهد سنطروق وعبدسميا، تم تكريسه لـ اللَّاتُ (حرفيًا «الإلهة»)، إلهة من أصل عربي، ممثلة على نقوش بارزة في المبنى المخصص لمهرجان مخصص لها مكرسة، حيث قدم له الملك إجلالا. شاهيرو، إله الفجر أو القمر، موجود أيضًا في العديد من النقوش. فيما يتعلق بالآلهة السورية، كان في المدينة أماكن عبادة مخصصة لبعل شمين، «رب السماوات»، والإلهة أتارغاتيس («الآلهة السورية» للمؤلفين اليونانيين والرومان، بحيث يمكن مقارنتها بالإلهة الغربية. -سياسات مثل عشتروت أو عنات أو عشيرات). فيما يتعلق بآلهة بلاد ما بين النهرين، نجد على وجه الخصوص نيرغال، إله العالم السفلي، الذي استوعبه الإغريق والرومان في هيراكليس، والذي يبدو أيضًا أنه كان له دور حامي الأبواب والمعابد والمنازل في الحضر. يوجد أيضًا مكان عبادة مخصص لكاتب الله نبو والإلهة ناني، بالإضافة إلى شهادة من كاهنة للإلهة عشتار دي أربيل، إحدى الآلهة الرئيسية في بلاد آشور القديمة، وربما أيضًا اسم ذكر الله آشور.
لا يُعرف سوى القليل عن الجوانب الملموسة للعبادة المكرسة لهذه الآلهة. تشير النقوش إلى العديد من الوظائف الكهنوتية، بما في ذلك الكهنة (kmrʾ، المصطلح الآرامي؛ مصطلح hdrptʾ من أصل إيراني الذي يشير إلى كاهن النار) بالإضافة إلى وكلاء المعبد (rbyt)، المسؤولين عن الجوانب اللوجستية للعبادة. كان هناك كاهنات، مثل أولئك الذين كرّسوا للإلهة عشتار. تأتي الدلائل على ممارسات العبادة من دراسة الهندسة المعمارية للمباني التي تم تحديدها على أنها معابد، ولا سيما المذابح التي يجب استخدامها في القرابين والقرابين، بالإضافة إلى مقاعد الإيوانات العظيمة وبعض المعابد التي يجب أن تكون تستخدم خلال الولائم الطقسية (المرتبطة تقليديا بعبادة الأجداد في بلاد ما بين النهرين القديمة وسوريا). فيما يتعلق بالممارسات الدينية الأخرى، مثل العرافة، يبدو أن بعض الكتابة على الجدران هي أبراج، وتشير النقوش إلى التواصل بين الآلهة والبشر من خلال الأحلام (التوحيد).

الفن
هِمَّتْهم في النحت: مثل النقوش الناتئة على جدران البنايات والتماثيل. فهي مجموعة من الرقم التي تحكي فنون بلاد الجزيرة الفراتية في زمن الأشكانيين. زينت أطلال الحضر بزخارف متقنة وجميلة. مثل صور الزهور والنباتات (غالبًا ما تكون كورنثية، كما في المعبد الكبير) والعتبات، مما يدل على إقتباسهم من فنون الإغريق والروم. والتماثيل المنصوبة على خزائن الإيوانات العظيمة. وعلى عتباتهم صور باهرة للحيوانات( القنطور، وحوش البحر، والغريفين) وعلى جانبي معبد اللات، صور للربتهم تمتطي ناقة، مقبلةً على المدينة وربما تعني هذه الصور لشعائر دينية. · .

جل التماثيل أو الأصنام والنقوش المكتشفة في المعابد تصور آلهتم. ومادتها من الحجر الجيري أو المرمر والأحجار المستخرجة من باطن الأرض. وصغر حجمها فيه دلالة على أنها نذور وقرابين. غالبًا ما تكون مزخرفة، مما يجعل من الممكن التعرف على الألوهية الممثلة وبالتالي الأيقونية الإلهية للحضر. وهكذا يُصَور رب الشمس على أنه رجل أصلع، له قرنان، وعلى رأسه شعاع الشمس. يظهر بار مارين، في أحيان كثيرة، بمظهر مشابه، مرتدياً رداءً أو نحوه مطرز ذو أكمام قصيرة ويلف حول خصره ويشد بحزام من القماش. وربة الشر أكثرهم تبجيلاً وتصويراً هو نرجال هرقليس، وصورتة كرجل ملتحٍ، عارٍ، متكئًا على عصاه، مثل زيوس كبير آلهة اليونان. كذلك يجسدون نابو برجل متخذاً درعًا، وله لحية طويلةٌ كثيفة كلحية ملوك الآشوريين، أكتشف في المعبد الخامس. وأيضاً يصورون العقبان، وهو صفة حيوان مارين. غالبًا ما تمثل النقوش البارزة على اللوحات والمذابح شيئًا دينيًا مهمًا في الحضر، يُطلق عليه اسم سامية، وهو معيار يتكون من عمود تعلق عليه الرموز الدينية: قمر هلال في الأعلى، وأقراص تحتوي على نسر، وتماثيل نصفية للإله، وحلقات مزخرفة.
التماثيل الدنيوية هي عمومًا بالحجم الطبيعي، أو حتى أكبر، فارتفاعها 1.90 مترًا. وهذه تماثيل للنذور لأنها تصور رجل/ إمرأة رافعاً يده اليمنى، وهي صفة صلاة أهل العراق والجزيرة الفراتية: تتمثل وظيفتها بالتالي في تمثيل المخلص واستبداله في المعبد حيث وضعت، على ما يبدو على منصات. لهذه التماثيل أيقونات أو شعار تميز مكانة المرء الممثل. فيرتدي الملوك سترة مطرزة - يقال أنها من الفرس - ذات أكمام طويلة، ويلف حولها بحزام، وسيفٍ ذو شفرتين وسروال وخفين. ويطيلون شعورهم، ويضعون تاجاً أو إكليل لملوكهم؛ وتزين هذه التيجان بالعقبان، شعار إله الحضر العظيم. وهم ملتحون، والأشراف الذين يرتدون ملابس مماثلة لا أصل لهم. ويلي الأدنى من الأشراف هم: الكهنة ويرتدون سترات طويلة، حفاة، وأحيانًا يرتدون قبعة مخروطية الشكل. يرتدي الجنود، الذين كانوا يرتدون سيفاً طويلاً وعباءة كبيرة، غطاء رأس مستديرًا أحيانًا. «النبلاء»، وهم في الواقع مجموعة لا يمكن تحديد وظيفتها، يرتدون عادةً سترات طويلة وسراويل، وهي سمة من سمات نخب العصر البارثي. تمثيل النساء ضعيف مع ثلاثة عشر تمثالًا معروفًا فقط. يرتدون ثوبًا طويلًا، بدون حزام، فوق سترة طويلة (خيتون)، ويرتدون أغطية رأس عالية تدعم الحجاب الذي يقع خلفهم، وكذلك الحلي التي تكون أكثر أو أقل ثراءً حسب رتبتهم الاجتماعية

موقع الحضر في العصر الحديث
إعادة الاكتشاف والتنقيب والترميم
أعيد اكتشاف موقع الحضر الذي سقط في النسيان متأخراً بسبب عزلته. أول علماء الآثار الذين اهتموا بها كانوا الفرق الألمانية بقيادة والتر أندريه الذي حفر في موقع قلعة الشرقاط، آشور القديمة في عام 1907 وحدد معالمه الرئيسية. ومع ذلك، لم يتم حفر الموقع بشكل منهجي حتى عام 1951 من قبل الفرق العراقية. وسرعان ما تبعهم مشروع إعادة إعمار كبير للمعالم الأثرية الرئيسية في الموقع، وهي معابد السياج المقدس والعلبة نفسها. نُشر التوليف الأول على الموقع في عام 1974 من قبل فؤاد صفر ومحمد علي مصطفى  · . في ذلك الوقت، كان موقع الحضر موضع اهتمام خاص من جانب النظام البعثي لأحمد حسن البكر، لا سيما بسبب نسبته إلى سلالة عربية، مما أشبع القومية العربية التي روج لها هذا النظام الغذائي؛ وهكذا توج مهرجان ربيع الموصل عام 1969، الذي استغله النظام، بتجمع 7000 شخص حول معبد الحضر الكبير. في تلك السنوات نفسها، أعيدت تسمية الحي (القضاء) بما في ذلك الموقع القديم باسمه (الحضر).
واصلت الفرق العراقية نشاطها على الموقع حتى حرب الخليج الأولى، بدعم من الفرق الإيطالية خلال الحملات من 1986 إلى 1989 ثم بين 1993 و 1997 تحت إشراف روبرتا فينكو ريكياردي ، والفرق البولنديين بقيادة ميشيل جوليكوفسكي عام 1990 الذين كرسوا أنفسهم لدراسة النظام الدفاعي للمدينة  · .. تم تصنيف الموقع كموقع تراث عالمي لليونسكو في عام 1985/70. استمر العمل على نتائج الحفريات، ولا سيما الاكتشافات الكتابية ، منذ ذلك الحين، وأثنت العديد من التوليفات معرفتنا بالموقع. التكتل الحديث يقع جنوب الموقع في محافظة نينوى قضاء الحضرة. في الحضر تم تصوير المشاهد الأولى من فيلم طارد الأرواح الشريرة (فيلم).

التدمير
معظم الأعمال الفنية التي تم العثور عليها قبل الحرب في الحضر موجودة في الموصل أو متاحف بغداد حيث تم نقلها خلال حرب الخليج الثانية في عام 2003؛ ثم سُرق جزء منه ولا يزال مطلوبًا. في 7 آذار / مارس 2015 دمّر تنظيم الدولة الإسلامية موقع الحضر بالمتفجرات والجرافة. بعد الموقع الأثري لنمرود ومتحف الموصل، تم تقديم مدينة الحضر القديمة بشكل صريح على أنها الهدف التالي لداعش. إن المدى المادي للضرر، الذي يصعب تقديره، كبير. وقد شجبت اليونسكو هذا التدمير للأماكن المرموقة، الذي نُظم لوسائل الإعلام، باعتباره «جريمة حرب»، كجزء من مشروع خبيث «للتطهير الثقافي». ويصاحب ذلك تجارة عالمية غير مشروعة في بعض الأعمال الفنية من المواقع المدمرة  تمت إضافة الموقع من قبل اليونسكو إلى قائمة التراث العالمي المعرض للخطر في يوليو 2015.
انتزع الحشد الشعبي أنقاض مدينة الحضر من الدولة الإسلامية في 26 أبريل / نيسان 2017. وقالت متحدثة باسم القوات إن داعش دمر المنحوتات والصور المنقوشة للموقع، لكن جدرانه وأبراجه كانت لا تزال قائمة على الرغم من احتوائها على ثقوب وخدوش تلقتها من رصاص داعش. كما ذكرت وحدات قوات الحشد الشعبي أن المجموعة قامت بتفكيك البوابات الشرقية للموقع، وبالتالي منعت مؤقتًا أي تقييم للأضرار من قبل علماء الآثار. أُفيد في 1 مايو أن الموقع تعرض لأضرار أقل مما كان يُخشى في وقت سابق. أفاد صحفي من إفي في وقت سابق بالعثور على العديد من التماثيل المدمرة والمباني المحترقة بالإضافة إلى علامات النهب. وقالت ليلى صالح رئيسة آثار محافظة نينوى أن معظم المباني كانت سليمة والدمار لا يقارن مع تدمير المواقع الأثرية الأخرى في العراق. كما ذكر قائد في قوات الحشد الشعبي أن الضرر كان طفيفًا نسبيًا.

ملوك الحضر
وقيل أن ملوك الحضر من قضاعة بن معد 

توالى على هذه المدينة أربعة ملوك في أربع وثمانين سنة  وهم:

الملك ولجش (من 158 حتى 165 م)
الملك سنطروق الأول/ الساطرون (من 165 حتى 190 م) وهو أخو الملك ولجش. ولقب ب«ملك العرب» حسب ماهو منقوش على الأطلال.
الملك عبدسميا بن السنطروق (من 190 حتى 200 م)
الملك سنطروق الثاني بن عبدسميا (من 200 حتى 241 م)

سكان الحضر
وأهل الحضر من العرب، وفيها طوائف من الجرامقة والنبط الذين كان لهم أثرٌ في اللغة والعقيدة. كانت مدينة الحضر واقعة على الطريق الرابط بين عاصمتي السلوقيين سلوقية وأنطاكية.

ديانة المملكة
كان الحضرانيون وثنيين يعبدون آلهة عدة منها اللات وشمش «الشمس» قد أطلق الحضرانيون كلمة (شمش) ليعنوا بها الحقيقة المطلقة، ونعتوا الشمس بالإله الأكبر وقد صوروه على هيئة كهل عاقل كما تبين رسومهم على أقواس واسكفات في المعبد الكبير.
وقد أختلف حول إسم الإله شمش وله أسماء كثيرة عند عرب الجاهلية، فهو من الآلهة التي عبدتها العرب منذ القدم في شمال جزيرة العرب واليمن. وقيل إنها كانت إلهاً ذكراً عند العرب. أما بعل سمين أو «بعل شمين» فهو آلهة شبيهة عند عرب اليمن وهو رب السماء عند اليمانيين الذين أخذوا عبادته من العرب الشماليين.

معرض الصور
انظر أيضًا
مدينة الحضر
مملكة ميسان
مملكة المناذرة

المراجع
وصلات خارجية
مقالة بورتر
من كتاب الروض الأنف
من كتاب تاريخ ابن خلدون
- رويدة النواب - العمارة الحضرية


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 7,606
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hatra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hatra (araméen : ḥṭrʾ d-šmš « Enclos du Soleil » ; arabe : al-Ḥaḍr, الحضر, « l'enclos », « l'agglomération ») est une ancienne cité arabe de Haute Mésopotamie, dans le Nord de l'Irak actuel. Elle s'est développée au cours des trois premiers siècles de l'ère chrétienne, en particulier au IIe siècle, alors qu'elle était capitale d'un royaume puissant, allié de l'Empire parthe, et qu'elle résista à plusieurs sièges des armées de l'Empire romain. Hatra fut un important centre religieux, dont la divinité principale était le Dieu-Soleil (Shamash). Son rayonnement s'étendait aux tribus arabes voisines, et elle était sans doute aussi un important centre caravanier. Sa culture était un mélange de traditions mésopotamiennes, syriennes, gréco-romaines et iraniennes, visible notamment dans les domaines religieux, architecturaux et artistiques. Elle fut détruite après la chute des Parthes, par les Perses sassanides d'Ardachîr Ier et Shapur Ier en 241 puis abandonnée par la suite.
La ville est aujourd'hui appelée al-Hadr et se trouve dans la province de Ninive, à environ 290 km au nord-ouest de Bagdad et 110 km au sud-ouest de Mossoul. Les ruines, dominées par plusieurs grands temples et les restes de son imposante muraille, furent fouillées au début du XXe siècle par des archéologues allemands puis, à partir des années 1950, par des équipes irakiennes, avant d'être inscrites au patrimoine mondial de l'UNESCO en 1985 ; elles firent l'objet d'un important plan de reconstruction de la part des autorités irakiennes. Le 7 mars 2015, le site a été pillé et a fait l'objet de destructions perpétrées par l'État islamique.

Histoire
L'histoire de Hatra est mal connue. Elle est essentiellement reconstituée grâce à des récits de quelques historiens romains (Dion Cassius, Hérodien et Ammien Marcellin), qui l'évoquent dans le contexte des conflits entre les Empires romain et parthe. Hatra aurait été l'ennemie des Romains, donc vraisemblablement l'alliée des Parthes. Les sources épigraphiques retrouvées à Hatra fournissent quelques indices sur les évolutions institutionnelles et la montée en puissance des monarques de Hatra, mais ne rapportent aucun événement politique ou militaire. L'intense activité de construction de monuments décidée par ces souverains est un autre indice de leur importance politique croissante.

L'essor de la ville et son contexte géographique et politique
La ville de Hatra semble émerger dans le courant du Ier siècle de notre ère. Aucune trouvaille sur le site ni aucune source écrite n'indiquent qu'elle ait existé auparavant, bien qu'une ville située dans la même région soit mentionnée dans un texte du XVIIIe siècle av. J.-C. ; elle porte un nom similaire, Haṣaru, construit sur la même racine sémitique signifiant « enclos ».
À l'époque de la création de Hatra, la Haute Mésopotamie était dominée par les Parthes depuis les années 120-110 av. J.-C. Elle était peuplée par des populations parlant des dialectes araméens, les descendants des Assyriens et des Araméens de la première moitié du Ier millénaire av. J.-C., que les textes de l'époque désignent à plusieurs reprises par les termes « Assyriens » ou « Syriens », et par des tribus arabes qui s'étaient implantées dans la région depuis le milieu du Ier millénaire av. J.-C., en particulier autour de Hatra et dans la région du moyen Euphrate. Les auteurs grecs et romains nommaient d'ailleurs cet espace « Arabie ».
Le site de Hatra est situé dans un espace qui semble avoir été peu occupé par le passé. La région est considérée comme désertique, car on n'y trouve qu'un seul cours d'eau, non pérenne, le wadi Tharthar. Cette région, la basse Djézireh, est une zone de plateaux située à la limite de la zone où l'agriculture sèche est possible ; plusieurs villages et fermes contemporains ont été repérés dans son voisinage, surtout au nord où les pluies se font plus abondantes, ce qui indique qu'il y avait là une activité culturale. Il s'agissait sans doute de sites saisonniers occupés par des populations semi-nomades, même si certains villages furent sans doute occupés en permanence par des communautés d'agriculteurs sédentaires. Au sud de Hatra, en revanche, la steppe dominait et il y avait peu d'habitats fixes. Cette région devait alors voir cohabiter des populations pratiquant un semi-nomadisme pastoral et celles pratiquant l'agriculture permanente. La ville principale au voisinage de Hatra était Assur, située à une cinquantaine de kilomètres à l'ouest, sur le Tigre. C'était un centre important depuis plusieurs millénaires, ancienne capitale de l'Assyrie, qui avait connu un regain de prospérité au début du Ier millénaire. Cette ville semble avoir servi, tout comme Hatra, de point d'ancrage de l'autorité des Parthes dans la partie occidentale de la Haute Mésopotamie.
Les causes du développement de Hatra sont discutées. On met souvent en avant le rôle du commerce caravanier, la ville étant située sur la route reliant Ctésiphon, la capitale des Parthes, à la Syrie, notamment le nœud routier de Nisibe ; Hatra figure sur la Table de Peutinger comme une étape sur cet axe. Mais il n'y a pas vraiment d'indices plaidant en faveur d'un rôle majeur du commerce dans la vie de la cité. Une explication plus couramment retenue est son rôle en tant que sanctuaire religieux servant pour les populations sédentaires et nomades de la région, adorant le dieu du Soleil et les autres grandes divinités de la ville. Mais la réalité est sans doute plus complexe, plusieurs facteurs ayant dû jouer, dont celui du développement de l'arrière-pays agricole qui n'était pas forcément aussi pauvre que ce qu'on pense généralement. Le facteur politique aurait également eu son rôle. Hatra semble s'être affirmée en tant qu'entité politique vassale des Parthes, lesquels dominaient alors la Mésopotamie et le plateau Iranien. L'apparition de Hatra dans l'histoire correspond à l'expansion maximale du royaume d'Adiabène (Arbèles, Ninive, Ecbatane et Gaugamèles), situé juste au nord de Hatra. Selon Javier Teixidor, au Ier siècle, ce royaume a peut-être aussi contrôlé Hatra. Pour Teixidor qui résume la position dominante, « Hatra, ville formée par des peuplades arabes, aurait été organisée par les Parthes et serait devenue un royaume dans la première moitié du IIe siècle. » Le royaume de Hatra est en effet souvent vu comme une sorte d'État-tampon entre l'Empire romain et les Parthes, jouissant d'une quasi-indépendance : les Parthes semblent en effet s'être peu préoccupés des affaires de leurs vassaux-alliés tant qu'ils ne contrecarraient pas leurs projets et leur apportaient leur soutien lorsqu'il était requis.
Mais les relations entre Hatra et les Parthes étant très mal documentées, leur reconstruction par les historiens repose sur des hypothèses, plausibles mais non démontrables, aucun texte n'évoquant d'ailleurs Hatréens et Parthes combattant côte à côte. Cela a sans doute pour conséquence de minimiser le rôle propre des souverains de Hatra, dont la politique extérieure est généralement présentée au travers du prisme de la dualité entre Parthes et Romains.

Débuts de l'expansion
Le premier auteur à mentionner l'existence de Hatra, Dion Cassius, le fait pour évoquer le siège infructueux de la ville conduit par l'empereur romain Trajan en 116-117, alors qu'il revenait d'une campagne en Babylonie contre les Parthes, et qu'il faisait face à une insurrection des pays qu'il avait laissés derrière lui après la première partie de la campagne (qui a débuté en 114). L'historien évoque une ville ni riche ni prospère, qui n'avait pas encore l'envergure qu'elle devait prendre dans les années suivantes. Ses habitants furent pourtant en mesure d'opposer une résistance vigoureuse aux assiégeants. Le siège aurait échoué parce que les troupes romaines, éprouvées par le climat désertique et menées par un empereur à la santé déclinante (il devait mourir peu après), auraient manqué d'eau et de bois pour le conduire à son terme :

« Ensuite il partit pour l'Arabie et attaqua les Hatréens, qui, eux aussi, avaient fait défection. Leur ville n'est ni grande ni riche, et le pays d'alentour est un vaste désert ; il a fort peu d'eau (et encore ce peu est-il détestable), il n'a pas de bois ni de pâturages. Ces obstacles, qui, par leur nombre, rendent un siège impossible, et le Soleil, à qui elle est comme consacrée, suffisent pour défendre la ville ; car ni Trajan alors, ni Sévère dans la suite, ne purent la prendre, bien qu'ils aient démoli des portions de ses murailles. Trajan, qui avait détaché sa cavalerie, éprouva un échec si notable, qu'elle fut repoussée jusque dans le camp, et que lui-même, qui s'était avancé à cheval avec elle, manqua de peu d'être blessé, bien qu'ayant quitté le vêtement impérial de peur d'être reconnu. Mais, en voyant, la majesté de sa chevelure blanche et la dignité de son visage, les barbares soupçonnèrent qui il était ; ils lancèrent des flèches contre lui et tuèrent un cavalier à ses côtés. De plus, des tonnerres grondaient, des arcs-en-ciel se montraient ; des éclairs, des tourbillons, de la grêle et des foudres tombaient sur les Romains quand ils livraient un assaut. Lorsqu'ils prenaient leurs repas, des mouches, tombant dans ce qu'ils mangeaient et dans ce qu'ils buvaient, infectaient tout. Aussi Trajan, en cet état de choses, se retira, et, peu après, sa maladie commença. »

— Dion Cassius, Histoire romaine, Livre LXVIII. 31, traduction à partir de E. Gros (1867).
Il semble que la prospérité de Hatra commença après le retrait des troupes romaines. C'est en tout cas à cette époque que remonte la plus ancienne inscription trouvée sur le site qui puisse être datée avec certitude, et qui concerne la construction d'une salle du sanctuaire principal de la ville. Celle-ci était alors dirigée par un personnage appelé Worod, qui porte dans les inscriptions le titre de « seigneur » (māryā), et qui était peut-être déjà en fonction lors du siège de Trajan. Deux autres seigneurs de Hatra, Elkûd et Ma'anû, apparaissent dans des inscriptions, mais on ne sait pas à quelle période ils ont régné.

L'époque des « rois des Arabes »
Une inscription datée de 134 évoque le seigneur qui dirigeait alors la ville, Nashryahb, et son fils aîné, Nasrû, qui semble avoir été associé à l'exercice du pouvoir. Ce dernier devint à son tour seigneur dans les années qui suivirent. Ces deux règnes furent marqués par une intense activité de constructions : l'enceinte du grand sanctuaire fut érigée en 138 à l'initiative de Nasrû, à l'époque prince héritier, puis, au plus tard au début des années 150, ce fut la grande enceinte extérieure de la ville qui sortit de terre, étendant considérablement l'espace couvert par la cité ; le tracé des murailles antérieures n'a pas été identifié par les archéologues. Plusieurs temples sont également datés de son règne. Sur les inscriptions commémorant ces actes, Nasrû se présentait également comme « grand-prêtre du dieu Soleil » (afkalā rabbā d-šamš), ce qui indique que sa fonction avait également un aspect religieux. Il était assisté dans ses fonctions par un dignitaire appelé rabbaytā, « préposé à la Maison (du dieu) ». Il avait sans doute une fonction surtout religieuse car il était responsable de l'affichage des décrets légaux de la ville, dont l'origine est attribuée aux dieux.
Le successeur de Nasrû est son fils Wologash (Vologèse, nom d'origine parthe porté par plusieurs souverains de cet empire), qui fut le premier à porter le titre de « roi des Arabes » (malka di Arab), ce qui semblerait révéler une extension de l'autorité des seigneurs de Hatra aux territoires alentour. Les statues des rois furent alors dotées d'une tiare à crête, caractéristique des rois vassaux de Hatra. On ne sait pas exactement dans quelles conditions cette évolution se produisit. Il est possible qu'il faille la relier aux événements entraînés par les conflits entre Parthes et Romains : dans les années 161-165, après plusieurs guerres, le roi parthe Vologèse IV perdit la moyenne vallée de l'Euphrate au profit de ses adversaires, qui lui ravirent la suzeraineté sur le royaume d'Édesse (ou Osroène). Il pourrait alors avoir cherché à augmenter la puissance de ses vassaux de Hatra pour renforcer leur place dans son dispositif de défense, en les élevant à la dignité royale et en leur conférant une autorité sur les populations voisines. Mais en l'absence de document explicite sur ce point, cela reste conjectural. Wologash ne régna sans doute pas longtemps, puisque son frère Sanatrûq Ier lui succéda au plus tard en 177.
Sanatrûq régna quelques années, en associant son fils Abdsimya aux affaires, lui conférant le titre de « prince héritier » (pašgrībā), avant que celui-ci ne lui succède au plus tard en 193. C'est en effet à cette date qu'il apparaît dans un texte de l'historien Hérodien, sous le nom de Barsemias, dans le contexte de la guerre civile qui avait lieu dans l'Empire romain : il envoya un contingent d'archers, à la demande du roi parthe Vologèse V, au légat romain de la Syrie, Pescennius Niger, lequel revendiquait le titre d'empereur. Ce dernier fut finalement vaincu par Septime Sévère qui, en réplique, assiégea Hatra à deux reprises dans les années 190, essuyant deux échecs devant les solides remparts de la ville. Il eut plus de succès dans les régions situées à l'ouest de Hatra, où il installa une légion faisant directement face à la ville.
Les relations entre Hatra et les Parthes semblent avoir été assez distantes ; Hérodien (III.28) évoque le fait que le roi parthe « se (voyait) tout à fait étranger à la lutte engagée entre Sévère et les Hatréens, et ne (prenait) de cette guerre aucun ombrage ». Au fil du temps, l'influence parthe paraît de moins en moins perceptible dans la région et les rois de Hatra plus indépendants. Le contexte militaire explique sans doute pourquoi le fils d'Abdsimya, Sanatrûq II, renforça les murailles de la cité en 200, alors qu'il n'était encore que prince héritier. Il régna dans les premières décennies du IIIe siècle, associant son fils Abdsimya (II) au pouvoir, mais on ne sait pas si ce dernier lui succéda.

La chute de la ville et sa légende
La chute de l'Empire parthe face aux Perses emmenés par Ardashir, fondateur de la dynastie des Sassanides en 223, rebattit les cartes de la géopolitique de la Haute Mésopotamie et de tout le Moyen-Orient. Il fallut quelques années aux troupes perses pour éliminer le dernier roi parthe et soumettre ses principaux vassaux du plateau Iranien. Ardashir se tourna ensuite vers l'ouest, contre les Romains, auxquels Sanatrûq II aurait fait appel pour éviter de partager le sort des autres serviteurs des Parthes. Une inscription trouvée à Hatra, datant de 235, indique qu'une cohorte romaine y était alors stationnée. Il est donc possible que Hatra ait alors été alliée et même une cliente des Romains, voire qu'elle ait connu une nouvelle expansion de son autorité, vers l'ouest, sur les tribus arabes déjà vassales de Rome auparavant.
Quoi qu'il en soit, la ville subit le siège des Perses, menés par Shapur Ier, le fils d'Ardashir, dans les années qui suivirent ; elle fut finalement prise en 240, dans des conditions qui ne sont pas déterminées. L'archéologie documente surtout les travaux liés au siège final des Sassanides, qui entreprirent la construction de murs de circonvallation et contrevallation reliés à leur campement, sans doute à rechercher à l'est de la ville. La population de la ville fut manifestement déportée dans sa totalité, suivant les habitudes des vainqueurs. La cité ne fut jamais repeuplée car aucune trace d'occupation postérieure au siège n'a été retrouvée. Lorsqu'il passa dans la région en 363, au retour de la campagne désastreuse de l'empereur Julien contre les Sassanides, l'historien Ammien Marcellin décrivit Hatra comme une « ville antique, mais entourée d’une vaste solitude et depuis longtemps déserte. (XXV.8.5) »
La chute de Hatra (al-Ḥaḍr en arabe) est évoquée dans les traditions iraniennes et arabes postérieures, donnant lieu à des poèmes élégiaques sur le thème de la puissance brutalement anéantie. L'événement en lui-même reste mal établi, puisqu'il est souvent mal daté, par exemple par Ferdowsî qui le situe sous le règne de Shapur II au IVe siècle. Les récits sur la chute de Hatra rapportés par divers auteurs, notamment l'historien arabo-persan Tabari (Xe siècle), suivent à peu près la même trame. Le puissant roi de Hatra, issu d'une lignée illustre, aurait provoqué le roi sassanide Shapur en attaquant ses terres. Ce dernier aurait alors lancé une attaque contre lui et assiégé sa ville, sans succès, pendant plusieurs mois. La chute de la ville est imputée à la fille du roi de Hatra, la princesse Nadira, tombée amoureuse du roi perse après l'avoir aperçu du haut des murailles. Elle lui proposa alors son aide contre la promesse de l'épouser. La trahison est diversement rapportée : elle aurait indiqué à Shapur un rituel magique permettant de rendre inefficace le talisman protégeant les murailles de la ville, autrement imprenables, ou bien elle aurait enivré son père et livré les clefs de la ville à Shapur, ou bien encore aurait indiqué à ce dernier comment pénétrer dans la ville par la rivière. Une fois la ville prise, le Perse honora sa promesse de mariage, puis se rendit compte lors de la nuit de noces que la princesse avait une peau extrêmement délicate en la voyant saigner après le contact avec une feuille de myrte. Il demanda une explication et la princesse lui dit qu'il en était ainsi grâce aux traitements prodigués à sa peau grâce à son père, plein d'attentions envers elle. Scandalisé par le fait que sa nouvelle épouse ait pu trahir un père aussi aimant et craignant qu'elle n'en fasse de même avec lui, il la fit mettre à mort. Selon certains, cette histoire serait une lointaine aïeule du conte de La Princesse au petit pois, popularisé par Hans Christian Andersen.
L'archéologue et romancière Jane Dieulafoy a écrit le roman historique Rose D'Hatra (1893) qui donne vie aux circonstances de la chute de la ville.

Architecture et urbanisme
Dans son état final, à partir du milieu du IIe siècle, Hatra était une ville au plan grossièrement rond, selon le modèle urbanistique qui semble avoir été courant dans la Mésopotamie parthe puisqu'il se retrouve à Arbèles (l'ancienne Adiabène et présentement à Erbil) et Ctésiphon. En son centre s'élevait le vaste enclos du dieu Soleil, seul monument de pierre au sein d'une cité faite entièrement de brique crue. Ce sanctuaire, qui comprenait plusieurs temples à l'extrémité d'une vaste esplanade, était sans doute un lieu de pèlerinage annuel pour les Arabes de Mésopotamie. Le tissu urbain s'était progressivement constitué sans plan directeur dans toutes les directions autour de ce sanctuaire central. Il était protégé par une double muraille en briques crues. L'évolution historique du site reste mal connue en dehors de son dernier siècle d'existence, et il est difficile de savoir quels monuments sont les plus anciens, et quel aspect avait la cité avant les grands travaux du IIe siècle qui ont accompagné le véritable développement de Hatra.

La muraille
Les équipes de fouilles italiennes et polonaises ont repéré, à proximité de l'enceinte sacrée, des traces de murailles en pierre et briques crues, manifestement antérieures aux autres constructions du site. Il semblerait qu'il s'agisse de vestiges d'une muraille qui enserrait Hatra avant la construction de l'enceinte la plus récente et la plus visible lors des fouilles, celle construite sous le règne de Nasrû au milieu du IIe siècle. Cette première enceinte serait donc celle à laquelle furent confrontées les troupes de Trajan, avant le véritable essor de Hatra qui vit l'érection d'une muraille plus puissante englobant un espace plus vaste ainsi que celle de l'enceinte sacrée. L'espace délimité par cette première muraille ne peut être établi avec certitude car son tracé n'a pas encore été clairement identifié.
Le rempart principal de Hatra, courant sur environ six kilomètres, est bien connu grâce aux fouilles dont il a fait l'objet. Il était précédé par un fossé et délimitait un espace grossièrement circulaire. C'était un ouvrage en terre et briques crues, reposant sur un socle en pierre d'environ un mètre de hauteur et 3,50 mètres de large, plus en certains endroits où il avait été renforcé après les sièges des armées romaines. On a estimé sa hauteur originelle à une dizaine de mètres. Le haut du rempart devait être coloré, si on en juge par les nombreuses plaques à glaçure bleutée qui ont été mises au jour. Des tours espacées d'une trentaine de mètres défendaient la muraille et des bastions en pierre avaient été ajoutés au dispositif pour supporter des catapultes lors des sièges. Vers la fin de l'existence de la ville le mur principal avait été doublé  par un petit mur intérieur servant de seconde ligne de défense. Le rempart pouvait être franchi par quatre portes situées aux quatre points cardinaux, comprenant une chicane à l'entrée et une cour intérieure. Ce dispositif imposant fut donc en mesure de résister aux sièges des armées romaines, et de tenir en respect les Perses pendant deux ans. Ces derniers érigèrent face à lui un mur encerclant toute la ville, circonvallation qui a été identifié par les archéologues, et qui illustre l'importance des efforts qu'ils durent consentir pour mener le siège à son terme.

Les monuments de l'enceinte sacrée
L'enceinte sacrée, délimitant un espace rectangulaire de 320 par 435 mètres, comprenait les principaux monuments de Hatra, construits en pierre de taille, qui ont fait l'objet d'importantes reconstructions (anastyloses) par les archéologues irakiens. Le mur qui séparait cet ensemble du reste de la ville avait été érigé sous le règne de Nasrû, en 138. Il était percé de portes sur ses quatre côtés. Cette enceinte intérieure était divisée en deux par un mur transversal isolant, à l'est, une vaste esplanade de plan grossièrement carré et quasiment vide de constructions, les principaux édifices étant localisés dans la partie ouest de l'enceinte sacrée, le long du mur transversal ou bien dans l'espace de 320 par 140 mètres) qu'il délimitait. Quelques pièces devant servir de magasins ainsi que des portiques se trouvaient sur certaines sections intérieures de l'enceinte sacrée. L'entrée principale de celle-ci donnait sur l'esplanade, depuis son côté est, et comprenait trois portails encadrés par quatre tours. L'entrée n'était pas située au centre de la muraille sur laquelle elle était percée, mais était légèrement excentrée vers le nord, pour faire face, de l'autre côté de l'esplanade, aux deux temples qui sont supposés être les plus anciens.
Plusieurs sanctuaires étaient disposés sur le côté ouest de l'esplanade, à proximité ou attenant au mur intérieur. La position centrale était occupée par le « temple hellénistique », dénomination due aux fouilleurs du site (le terme est assez impropre puisque l'inspiration architecturale est surtout romaine), appelé aussi « temple de Marân », la divinité principale de la ville. En réalité, on ne sait pas avec certitude quelles divinités étaient vénérées dans ce temple ; on ne sait pas non plus s'il y en avait une ou plusieurs. Son aspect était très marqué par l'influence grecque et romaine, même si son plan était original : de forme rectangulaire, il était bordé par une double rangée de colonnades, celle située sur l'extérieur étant érigée à même le sol, tandis que la seconde était surélevée sur la même terrasse que le temple à proprement parler, suivant le principe des temples à podium de type romain. La façade, dont les colonnes prennent appui sur le podium, disposait d'un fronton à archivolte, caractéristique de l'architecture syrienne d'inspiration gréco-romaine.

L'esplanade orientale comprenait également d'autres bâtiments importants, tous situés sur son côté ouest. Au nord, bâti sur le mur transversal, se trouvait un temple dont la façade disposait de trois iwans, de grandes salles voûtées percées sur un côté d'un porche en forme de grand arc, caractéristiques de l'architecture de l'époque parthe et qu'on retrouve dans plusieurs édifices de Hatra. Cet édifice avait été érigé sous le règne de Sanatruq Ier et dédié à la déesse Allat, représentée sur plusieurs bas-reliefs. Dans l'angle sud-ouest de l'esplanade et en son centre, se trouvaient deux autels à ciel ouvert, à l'usage mal connu.
Au niveau du temple dit de Marân, deux portails voûtés donnaient accès, dans la partie ouest de l'enceinte sacrée, à un premier temple, dit de Shahiru, bâti au même niveau que le temple précédent ; l'enceinte qui les séparait avait sans doute été érigée après les deux temples qui sont probablement les plus anciens du site. L'entrée de ce second temple, donnant sur le sud, comprenait un porche à quatre colonnes et une porte voûtée de plein cintre ouvrant sur la cella, dans le style des iwans.
La partie occidentale de l'enceinte sacrée était elle-même traversée par un mur transversal, qui passait par le plus vaste monument de Hatra, situé au centre de cette partie de l'enceinte sacrée. Il s'agissait d'un vaste monument, long de 115 mètres, comprenant un alignement de huit rangées d'arches, dont deux iwans plus élevés que les autres, à plus de vingt-cinq mètres de hauteur et ouvrant sur deux salles voûtées de trente-quatre par quinze mètres (l'iwan sud et l'iwan central). Ces deux grandes portes étaient bordées par de hautes colonnes engagées à chapiteaux corinthiens, les séparant de deux rangées de plus petits iwans, ceux situés au-dessus étant fermés par un mur. Le grand iwan du sud ouvrait sur un grand édifice carré de vingt-huit mètres de côté, peut-être un ajout tardif, constitué d'une pièce centrale carrée et voûtée, entourée d'un couloir lui-même voûté. Deux iwans de taille médiane se trouvaient dans la partie nord de l'édifice, ouvrant sur une même salle transversale voutée ; ils avaient sans doute été édifiés plus tardivement que le reste de la construction. Le toit de l'édifice avait disparu, mais ses tuiles glaçurées bleues ont été retrouvées lors des fouilles au sol. La pièce voûtée carrée située derrière le grand iwan du sud semble avoir été l'espace de culte principal du dieu-Soleil, le corridor qui la bordait sur ses quatre côtés ayant pu servir pour des rites de circumambulation. Les salles sur lesquelles ouvraient les plus petites portes voûtées devaient être des salles annexes du sanctuaire. Les grands iwans paraissent, quant à eux, avoir été des lieux de réunion servant à recevoir de nombreux hôtes, comme l'indiquent les banquettes qui se trouvaient sur les bords des deux grands iwans du complexe principal. Il ne s'agissait donc pas forcément de sanctuaires à proprement parler, du moins pas au sens classique du terme, en tant que « saint des saints », quoiqu'ils semblent bien avoir disposé d'autels sur les podiums qui s'y trouvaient. Les occasions de réunions devaient être des fêtes religieuses marquées par des sacrifices et des banquets rituels abondamment attestés dans les religions sémitiques de l'époque. Ce devaient être des moments importants dans la vie politique et religieuse de la cité, durant lesquels les seigneurs de Hatra, également grands-prêtres du dieu Soleil, recevaient les représentants des tribus de leur région et affirmaient ainsi leur rôle de « roi des Arabes ».

Deux autres sanctuaires étaient situés dans la moitié sud de la partie occidentale de l'enceinte sacrée : le « temple de Samya » et le « temple de la Triade ». Ils comprenaient tous les deux trois iwans alignés sur une même façade, celui du centre étant plus large, reproduisant en plus petite taille le modèle du temple principal.

Les autres constructions
L'espace situé entre la muraille et l'enceinte sacrée constituait la zone d'habitations de la ville de Hatra. Les photographies aériennes du site permettent de constater qu'elle était bâtie sur la majeure partie de sa surface, et le tracé des voies principales, larges, était encore bien lisible au sol au moment des fouilles, de même que celui d'autres voies secondaires plus resserrées au tracé plus irrégulier. Mais comme souvent pour les cités antiques, cette zone dépourvue de monuments majeurs n'a attiré que tardivement l'attention des archéologues et est donc moins connue que le complexe monumental.
Les équipes d'archéologues irakiens ont néanmoins repéré plusieurs édifices dans cette zone, notamment quatorze temples intra-urbains, fondés par des riches familles de la ville. Il s'agissait d'édifices de plan simple, comprenant une vaste pièce rectangulaire bordée de banquettes et ouvrant sur une petite pièce ou une simple niche qui devait comprendre l'image de la divinité vénérée dans le lieu ainsi qu'un autel. Ils ne possédaient en général pas de pièces annexes. L'entrée du temple I était un iwan, comme pour les temples de l'enceinte sacrée.
Les équipes italiennes ont, quant à elles, mis au jour des secteurs résidentiels. La quinzaine de résidences explorées sont de tradition mésopotamienne, caractérisée par une organisation autour d'une cour intérieure disposant d'un iwan servant d'espace de réception. La maison de Ma'nu, proche du temple I, est la plus étendue du site (2 700 m2). Elle disposait de plusieurs unités, la principale étant organisée autour d'une cour à deux iwans se faisant face et un portique. Les autres unités comprenaient des sortes de suites avec leurs propres espaces de réception, ainsi que des magasins ou des ateliers. Les mêmes équipes ont par ailleurs dégagé toute une section d'un quartier traversé par la rue allant du nord de l'enceinte sacrée jusqu'à la porte nord de la muraille de la cité. Il comprenait divers bâtiments, des résidences, des chapelles, des magasins qui donnaient sur la rue par des arcades. La plus vaste résidence dégagée dans ce quartier, l'« édifice A », s'étendait sur plus de 1 850 m2. Elle était organisée autour d'une cour centrale à iwan, et certains de ses murs étaient décorés par des peintures ou des graffitis ; les inscriptions indiquent qu'il s'agissait de la résidence du grand prêtre de Shahiru. Près de la porte nord de la muraille a également été repéré un édifice palatial comprenant une grande cour d'environ 47 par 50 mètres, à deux iwans, qui n'a jamais fait l'objet de fouilles systématiques.
Des tombes ont par ailleurs été explorées sur le site (environ 142 repérées), surtout à l'intérieur de la ville, isolées ou bien regroupées dans des nécropoles. Il s'agit de petits édifices quadrangulaires, de 6 à 11 mètres au sol, construits en pierre et disposant parfois d'un décor extérieur, des semi-colonnes engagées. Elles peuvent être constituées d'une chambre simple, ou bien divisées en deux ou trois unités constituées elles-mêmes d'une ou plusieurs pièces, sans que l'on sache ce que reflètent ces différences (diversité culturelle ou changements dans le temps ?).

La civilisation de Hatra
La prospérité de la cité venait essentiellement de l'exploitation de l'oasis qui la faisait vivre, ainsi que de l'élevage extensif pratiqué par les nomades. Sans doute pratiquait-elle aussi le commerce caravanier, mais on n'a pas retrouvé à Hatra d'inscriptions caravanières comme à Palmyre, cité qui lui ressemblait beaucoup par ailleurs.

Inscriptions, langues et écritures
Les monuments et objets d'arts de Hatra comportaient des inscriptions gravées, incisées ou peintes sur des blocs de pierre, reliefs, socles de statues. Environ 500 ont été identifiées sur le site, et sont approximativement datées du IIe siècle ; seules 26 ont pu être datées avec exactitude car elles indiquaient les années dans la computation séleucide.
Ces textes sont rédigés en alphabet araméen, langue dominante en Mésopotamie du Nord depuis la fin de l'Empire assyrien, au VIIe siècle av. J.-C. Il s'agit plus précisément d'une version orientale de l'araméen dont d'autres se retrouvent, pour cette même époque, sur les sites voisins d'Assur, Qabr Abu-Naïf et dans la région de Tikrit un peu plus au sud. Leur graphie est également très proche d'inscriptions de sites d'Arménie (Garni). Les inscriptions de Syrie, notamment celles de Palmyre et celles en syriaque, relèvent d'une tradition occidentale différente. L'alphabet de Hatra comprend 22 lettres, est de type consonantique et se lit de droite à gauche, comme la plupart des autres alphabets sémitiques. Les inscriptions sont plus ou moins soignées : celles de type « monumental », moins nombreuses et émanant des plus hautes autorités de la ville sont les mieux exécutées, tandis que celles de type cursif ou « pseudo-monumental », plus courantes, le sont moins. Une poignée d'inscriptions en latin datent de la période finale de Hatra, lorsqu'elle abritait une garnison romaine.
Du point de vue typologique, « les inscriptions hatréennes peuvent être rassemblées en trois groupes selon le formulaire : simple, moyen, complexe. Parmi les premières on compte surtout les textes commémoratifs (« qu'on se souvienne de... en bien et en beauté »), qui parfois comportent la mention des divinités (« qu'on se souvienne en bien de... devant Notre-Seigneur l'Aigle »). Parmi les inscriptions dont le formulaire est moyennement articulé, il y a des textes gravés sur la base des statues (« Statue de Sanatrûq fils de Sanatrûq le maître de guerre qu'a érigé pour lui... ») parfois avec une datation (« ...au mois de Nisan de l'an 473... »). Il reste enfin un certain nombre de textes dont le formulaire est très articulé (par exemple les inscriptions concernant les lois de la ville) et les malédictions. » (R. Bertolino). Les textes commémoratifs sont les plus nombreux. Ce corpus, composé de brèves inscriptions, est essentiellement de type religieux, et renseigne donc prioritairement le panthéon de Hatra et quelques lois religieuses. Indirectement, l'étude des noms de personnes peut être effectuée d'après ces textes, confirmant le caractère pluriel de la civilisation locale (araméenne, arabe, iranienne) ; on y trouve également des titres officiels, les noms de quelques tribus, ainsi que des généalogies permettant d'identifier certaines familles. En revanche ces inscriptions ne sont pas d'un grand secours pour reconstituer l'histoire politique de la ville.

La religion
La religion de Hatra, connue par l'étude des inscriptions du site et grâce à son art et son architecture, a des origines diverses (mésopotamienne, syrienne, arabe, gréco-romaine, iranienne).

La divinité principale de Hatra est le Dieu-Soleil, šmš dans les inscriptions (littéralement « Soleil »), Shamash dans la religion mésopotamienne antique. Les pièces de monnaie de la ville la présentent comme « Hatra de Shamash » (ḥtrʾ d-šmš), c'est-à-dire l'« Enclos (sacré) du Soleil ». Ce dieu était probablement la divinité principale du complexe monumental dominant l'enceinte sacrée.
Les inscriptions de Hatra insistent surtout sur le culte dédié à une triade constituée de Maren (mrn) « Notre Seigneur », Marten (mrtn) « Notre Dame » et Bar-Maren (br-mrjn) « Fils de Notre Seigneur ». Cette triade constituée d'un couple et de son fils est inconnue ailleurs et constitue donc une originalité de Hatra. La question de savoir s'il faut identifier « Notre Seigneur » comme une épithète de Shamash reste en suspens : certaines inscriptions semblent indiquer que oui, d'autres semblent au contraire les distinguer. Le dieu Aigle (nšrʾ, Nishra), dont parlent certaines inscriptions, semble être associé à Maren et à la fonction royale.
Les autres divinités attestées par les inscriptions sont bien connues par ailleurs, notamment à Palmyre, et sont d'origines diverses. Un des temples importants de la ville, érigé sous Sanatrûq et Abdsamya, est ainsi dédié à Allat (littéralement « la Déesse »), déesse d'origine arabe, représentée sur des bas-reliefs de l'édifice consacré à une fête qui lui était dédiée, au cours de laquelle le souverain lui rendait hommage. Shahiru, dieu de l'Aurore ou de la Lune, est également présent dans plusieurs inscriptions. En ce qui concerne les divinités syriennes, la ville disposait de lieux de culte dédiés à Baal-Shamin, le « Seigneur des Cieux », et à la déesse Atargatis (la « Déesse syrienne » des auteurs grecs et romains, à rapprocher des déesses ouest-sémitiques comme Astarté, Anat ou Asherat). En ce qui concerne les divinités mésopotamiennes, on trouve en particulier Nergal, le dieu des Enfers, assimilé à Héraclès par les Grecs et Romains, qui semble aussi avoir eu à Hatra une fonction de protecteur des portes, temples et maisons. Se trouvent également un lieu de culte dédié au dieu-scribe Nabû et à la déesse Nannai, ainsi qu'une attestation d'une prêtresse de la déesse Ishtar d'Arbelès, une des principales déesses de l'ancienne Assyrie, et peut-être aussi un nom de personne mentionnant le dieu Assur.
Les aspects concrets du culte dédié à ces divinités sont mal connus. Les inscriptions indiquent plusieurs fonctions sacerdotales, notamment des prêtres (kmrʾ, terme araméen ; hdrptʾ terme d'origine iranienne désignant un prêtre du feu) ainsi que des économes de temples (rbytʾ), chargés des aspects logistiques du culte. Il existait des femmes prêtres, telles celles consacrées à la déesse Ishtar. Les indications sur les pratiques cultuelles proviennent de l'étude de l'architecture des bâtiments identifiés comme des temples, notamment des autels qui ont dû servir pour des sacrifices et des libations, ainsi que des banquettes des grands iwans et de certains temples ayant dû servir lors de banquets rituels (traditionnellement liés au culte ancestral en Mésopotamie et en Syrie antiques). Concernant les autres pratiques religieuses, comme la divination, certains graffitis semblent être des horoscopes, et des inscriptions renvoient à la communication entre dieux et hommes par le biais de rêves (oniromancie).

L'art
L'art de Hatra est constitué essentiellement de sculptures : bas-reliefs sur les murs des monuments, stèles et statues. Il s'agit d'un ensemble de documents essentiels pour la connaissance de l'art de la Mésopotamie à l'époque parthe.
Les monuments de Hatra étaient richement ornés. Des motifs floraux ornaient ainsi leur chapiteaux (souvent corinthiens, comme dans le Grand temple) et architraves, témoignant d'une forte inspiration gréco-romaine. Des sculptures de personnes se trouvaient sur les voûtes des grands iwans. Leurs linteaux portaient des scènes plus complexes avec des animaux fantastiques : combat de centaures, monstres marins, griffons. Le temple d'Allat a, quant à lui, livré un bas-relief représentant la déesse montée sur un chameau, faisant son entrée dans la ville, ce qui renvoie peut-être à un rituel religieux.

De nombreuses autres statues ainsi que des bas-reliefs mis au jour dans les sanctuaires représentent des divinités. Ils sont taillés dans du calcaire ou de l'albâtre, pierres extraites localement. Leur petite taille indique qu'il s'agit en général d'offrandes votives. Elles sont souvent inscrites, ce qui permet d'identifier la divinité représentée et donc l'iconographie divine de Hatra. Le Dieu-Soleil est ainsi représenté en général sous l'aspect d'un jeune homme glabre, portant deux cornes, avec des rayons de soleil émanant de sa tête. Bar-Maren, plus souvent attesté, a une apparence similaire, vêtu en général d'une tunique à manches courtes richement décorée et maintenue autour de sa taille par une ceinture faite d'une pièce d'étoffe enroulée. Le dieu hatréen le plus représenté est Nergal-Héraclès, qui a la plupart du temps l'aspect d'un homme barbu, nu, appuyé sur un gourdin, iconographie traditionnelle du dieu grec. Nabû pourrait être représenté par la statue d'une divinité vêtue d'une cuirasse et portant une barbe rectangulaire de style assyrien, mise au jour dans le temple V. L'aigle, animal-attribut de Maren, est également souvent représenté. Des bas-reliefs sur des stèles et des autels représentent souvent un objet religieux important à Hatra, appelé samya, un étendard constitué d'un mât sur lequel sont accrochés des symboles religieux : un croissant de lune au sommet, des disques contenant un aigle, des bustes de divinité et des anneaux ornés.

Les statues représentant des personnages non divins sont généralement grandeur nature, voire plus, puisqu'elles font en moyenne 1,90 mètre de hauteur. Il s'agit manifestement de statues votives, puisqu'elles représentent souvent une personne en train de lever la main droite, geste de prière traditionnel en Mésopotamie : elles ont donc pour fonction de représenter le dédicant et de se substituer à lui dans le temple où elles étaient installées, apparemment sur des estrades. Ces statues utilisent des codes iconographiques qui permettent de distinguer clairement le rang de la personne représentée. Les rois sont ainsi revêtus d'une tunique à manches longues dite « parthe » richement décorée, maintenue par une ceinture à laquelle est souvent attachée une longue épée, un pantalon et des chaussures souples. Ils portent une coiffure caractéristique formant un grand bulbe, avec une tiare ou un diadème symbolisant leur royauté ; cette tiare est souvent orné d'un aigle, symbole du grand dieu de Hatra. Ils sont barbus, tandis que les princes, qui portent des vêtements similaires, sont glabres. Viennent ensuite les membres de l'élite sociale de Hatra : les prêtres, vêtus d'une longue tunique, pieds nus, et portant parfois un chapeau de forme conique. Les militaires, portant une longue épée et une grande cape, arborent parfois une coiffe ronde. Les « nobles », en fait un groupe dont la fonction ne peut être déterminée, portent en général une longue tunique et un pantalon, caractéristiques des élites de l'époque parthe. Les femmes sont peu représentées avec seulement treize statues connues. Elles sont vêtues d'une longue robe, sans ceinture, sur une tunique longue (chiton), et portent de hautes coiffes supportant un voile qui leur tombe dans le dos, ainsi que des bijoux, plus ou moins riches suivant leur rang social.

Le site de Hatra à l'époque contemporaine
Redécouverte, fouilles et restaurations
Le site de Hatra, tombé dans l'oubli, est redécouvert tardivement en raison de son isolement. Les premiers archéologues à s'y intéresser sont les équipes allemandes dirigées par Walter Andrae qui fouillent le site de Qalaat Sherqat, l'antique Assur en 1907 et repèrent ses monuments majeurs. Le site ne fait cependant l'objet de fouilles systématiques qu'à partir de 1951, par des équipes irakiennes. Elles sont rapidement suivies par un important projet de reconstruction des principaux monuments du site, à savoir les temples de l'enceinte sacrée et l'enceinte elle-même. La première synthèse sur le site est publiée en 1974 par Fuad Safar et Muhammad Ali Mustafa. À cette époque, le site de Hatra faisait l'objet d'attentions particulières de la part du régime baasiste d'Ahmad Hassan al-Bakr, notamment en raison de son attribution à une dynastie arabe, ce qui satisfaisait le pan-arabisme promu par ce régime ; la fête du printemps de Mossoul de 1969, instrumentalisée par le régime, culmina ainsi avec un rassemblement de 7 000 personnes autour du Grand Temple de Hatra. Dans ces mêmes années le district (qada) incluant le site antique fut renommé d'après lui (al-Hadar).
Les équipes irakiennes poursuivent leur activité sur le site jusqu'à la première guerre du Golfe, avec l'appui d'équipes italiennes lors de campagnes de 1986 à 1989 puis entre 1993 et 1997 sous la direction de Roberta Venco Ricciardi, et d'équipes polonaises dirigées par Michel Gawlikowski en 1990 qui se sont consacrées à l'étude du système défensif de la ville. Le site fut classé au patrimoine mondial de l'UNESCO en 1985. Les travaux sur les résultats des fouilles, notamment les découvertes épigraphiques, se sont poursuivis depuis, et plusieurs synthèses sont venues enrichir la connaissance du site.
L'agglomération moderne est au sud du site, dans la province de Ninive, district d'Al-Hadhra.
C'est à Hatra qu'ont été tournées les premières scènes du film L'Exorciste (1973).

Destruction
La plupart des œuvres d'art retrouvées avant la guerre à Hatra se trouvent au musée de Mossoul ou à celui de Bagdad où elles ont été déplacées lors de la seconde guerre du Golfe en 2003 ; une partie a alors été dérobée et est toujours recherchée. Le 7 mars 2015, le site de Hatra a été détruit par l'État islamique avec des explosifs et au bulldozer. Après le site archéologique de Nimrud et le musée de Mossoul, la vieille cité de Hatra avait été explicitement présentée comme la prochaine cible de Daech. L'ampleur matérielle des dégâts, difficilement estimable, est considérable.
Cette destruction de lieux prestigieux, mise en scène pour les médias, a été dénoncée par l'UNESCO comme un « crime de guerre », relevant d'une entreprise pernicieuse de « nettoyage culturel » ; elle s'accompagne d'un commerce illicite mondial de certaines œuvres d'art provenant des sites détruits. Le site est ajouté par l'UNESCO à la Liste du patrimoine mondial en péril en juillet 2015.
Les ruines d'Hatra sont reprises à l'État islamique par les Hachd al-Chaabi le 26 avril 2017.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Introductions
Henri Stierlin, Cités du désert : Pétra, Palmyre, Hatra, Fribourg, Office du Livre S. A., coll. « L'Art antique au Proche-Orient », 1987, 224 p. (ISBN 978-2-0200-9241-8), « Hatra, cité libre entre Tigre et Euphrate », p. 183-208.
(en) L. Michael White, « Hatra », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 2, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, 2608 p. (ISBN 978-0-1950-6512-1), p. 484-485.
Francis Joannès, « Hatra », dans F. Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, 2001, 974 p. (ISBN 978-2-7028-6657-3), p. 369-372.
(en) Rüdiger Schmitt, « Hatra », dans Encyclopædia Iranica, 2003 (lire en ligne) (consulté le 19 novembre 2015).

Synthèses
« Dossier Hatra », TOPOI, vol. 10, no 1,‎ 2000, p. 87-265 (lire en ligne).
Hatra, site irakien en danger : Patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco, Dijon, coll. « Les dossiers d'archéologie » (no 334), juillet-août 2009, 95 p. (ISSN 1141-7137).
(de) Michael Sommer, Hatra : Geschichte und Kultur einer Karawanenstadt im römisch-parthischen Mesopotamien, Mayence, Zabern, 2003, 83 p. (ISBN 978-3-8053-3252-1).
(en) Lucinda Dirven (dir.), Hatra : Politics, Culture and Religion between Parthia and Rome, Stuttgart, F. Steiner, 2013, 363 p. (ISBN 978-3-5151-0412-8).

Études spécialisées
Roberto Bertolino, Manuel d'épigraphie araméenne : le hatréen, Paris, Geuthner, 2008, 97 p. (ISBN 978-2-7053-3806-0).
(en) Krzysztof Jakubiak, Sacral Landscape in Hatra, Varsovie, Instytut Archeologii UW, 2014, 173 p. (ISBN 978-8-3613-7689-7).
(de) Sylvia Winkelmann, Katalog der parthischen Waffen und Waffenträger aus Hatra, vol. 4, Halle-sur-Saale, Orientwissenschaftliches Zentrum der Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, 2004, 352 p..
E. Martínez Borolio, « Aperçu de la religion des Araméens », dans G. del Olmo Lete (dir.), Mythologie et religion des sémites occidentaux, vol. 2 : Émar, Ougarit, Israël, Phénicie, Aram, Arabie, Louvain, 2008, 1291 p. (ISBN 978-9-0429-1897-9), p. 429-437.

Articles connexes
Parthes
Palmyre
Assur (ville)
Destruction du patrimoine culturel par l'État islamique

Liens externes

(en) « Hatra », Encyclopædia Britannica (consulté le 29 février 2016).
(en) « Hatra », Iraq Museum International (consulté le 6 avril 2015) — Photographies du site et d'œuvres d'art qui y ont été exhumées, site du Musée de Bagdad.
(it) « Hatra », Centro Ricerche Archeologiche e Scavi di Torino (consulté le 11 novembre 2015) — Présentation des fouilles italiennes du site, avec plans et photographies.

 Portail de l’archéologie   Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail du patrimoine mondial   Portail de la Mésopotamie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 148
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Hatra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Hatra is a ruin in Northwestern Iraq. It has suffered damage at the hands of ISIS, though most of the buildings are reportedly still intact.

## Get in
The city is 290 km northwest of Baghdad, and 110 km southwest of Mosul.

## See
Most of these sites were looted by ISIS. It is unclear what remains of them.
Temple of Mrn
The Grand Temple
Walls of Hatra

## Sleep
At the time of the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq there was one inn, the Al Hadr Hotel, about 1 km (0.62 mi) from the Hatra ruins. Much has happened since then. Due to Hatra's isolated location, do not assume lodging to be available – the next city of any size may well be more than a hundred kilometres/miles away.

## Stay safe
See the warning on the Syria article for information on the security situation.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ASHUR
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:34:13


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 128
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashur
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ashur or Assur may refer to:

Places
Assur, an archaeological site in Iraq, and former Assyrian capital
Ashur, Iran, a village in Iran
Assuras or Assur, a town in the Roman province of Proconsular Africa

Other uses
Ashur (Bible), the grandson of Noah in Genesis
Ashur (god), the main god of Assyrian mythology in Mesopotamian religion
High Elves (Warhammer) or Asur, a race in Warhammer Fantasy
Ashur, a gladiator dominus, the titular character in the 2025 TV show Spartacus: House of Ashur

See also

Ashur-dan (disambiguation)
Ashur-uballit (disambiguation)

All pages with titles beginning with Ashur
All pages with titles containing Ashur
Asur (disambiguation)
Assyria (disambiguation)
Asura (disambiguation)
Ashura (disambiguation)
Achour (disambiguation)
Assuristan, the Sassanid name for Assyria
Anshar, a primordial god in the Babylonian creation myth Enuma Elish


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 12,617
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assur_(ville)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assur (ou Assour, assyrien Aššur) est une ancienne ville, capitale de l'Assyrie jusqu'au début du IXe siècle av. J.-C., située sur la rive occidentale du Tigre. Ses ruines se trouvent actuellement sur le site de Qalʿat Sharqat, dans la plaine de Sharqat, à environ 110 kilomètres au sud de Mossoul. Le site principal est un promontoire dominant le fleuve, peuplé depuis au moins le début du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. Il a été fouillé au début du XXe siècle par des archéologues allemands, puis à plusieurs reprises après 1945 par des archéologues irakiens et allemands.
Les ruines du site d'Assur s'étendent sur une centaine d'hectares, dont plus de 65 hectares pour l'espace urbain protégé par des murailles à l'époque assyrienne. Les principaux monuments de l'époque assyrienne étaient situés dans la partie nord du site, sur le promontoire. On y trouvait le temple du dieu Assur, divinité nationale de l'Assyrie, qui était le principal sanctuaire de ce pays. Les souverains se sont toujours présentés comme les délégués terrestres de ce dieu, véritable souverain du royaume. Le palais principal (le « vieux palais »), situé à l'ouest du temple, était l'autre monument majeur du site, reconstruit à plusieurs reprises durant près de 1 500 ans. Les fouilles archéologiques ont dégagé d'autres temples et palais, ainsi que des groupes de résidences, et une grande quantité de textes cunéiformes constituant une source essentielle sur l'histoire assyrienne.
La cité d'Assur fut prise et détruite lors de la chute de l'empire assyrien, en 614 av. J.-C. Elle connut une dernière période de prospérité aux IIe et IIIe siècles de notre ère, durant l'époque de la domination de la Haute Mésopotamie par les Parthes. Le sanctuaire du dieu Assur fut alors reconstruit suivant les habitudes architecturales de l'époque, présentant des inspirations parthes et gréco-romaines. Un palais servant de résidence aux seigneurs de la ville fut construit au centre du site.
Après cette dernière période de prospérité et une nouvelle destruction vers 240, infligée sans doute par les Sassanides, le tell de Qalʿat Sharqat ne connut plus d'occupation importante. Il fut sans doute repeuplé de façon irrégulière à l'époque islamique, mais sert depuis essentiellement de site funéraire pour les habitants de la ville de Sharqat qui s'est développée à ses pieds. Le site est aujourd'hui menacé d'être englouti sous les eaux du fait d'un projet de construction d'un barrage en aval sur le fleuve (le barrage de Makhoul). En 2003, l'UNESCO a inscrit Assur sur la liste du patrimoine mondial, le considérant comme un site en péril.

Redécouverte et fouilles
Les ruines d'Assur se trouvent sur le tell appelé de nos jours Qalʿat-Sharqat, la « Forteresse de Sharqat », Sharqat étant la ville principale actuelle de la plaine alentour, qui s'étend à l'ouest du site archéologique. C'est la seule des grandes capitales assyriennes qui n'a pas été fouillée au milieu du XIXe siècle : parmi les principaux découvreurs de cette période des débuts de l'archéologie mésopotamienne, l'anglais Austen Henry Layard y fait quelques recherches en 1847 et 1850-51, son associé irakien Hormuzd Rassam y retourne quelques années plus tard. Ils en ramènent notamment une statue du roi Salmanazar III, ainsi qu'un prisme portant une inscription de Tukulti-Ninurta Ier. Cette inscription est restée fameuse dans l'histoire de l'assyriologie, puisque c'est en faisant traduire celle-ci simultanément par les premiers déchiffreurs du cunéiforme en 1857 et en obtenant des traductions proches, que le Royal Asiatic Society de Londres peut confirmer que cette écriture et de la langue akkadienne sont bien comprises.

Ce n'est qu'un demi-siècle après ces premières explorations, en 1903, que les fouilles plus substantielles commencent à Qalʿat-Sharqat, sous la conduite de la Deutsche Orient Gesellschaft (DOG, Société orientale allemande). Robert Koldewey, qui dirige alors les fouilles du site de Babylone, dépêche un de ses adjoints, Walter Andrae, architecte de formation tout comme lui, pour conduire les travaux à Qalʿat-Sharqat. Il y reste jusqu'en 1914. Andrae s'attache d'abord à déterminer l'organisation générale du site antique, notamment le tracé de ses murailles, puis il dégage les principaux groupes de monuments qui se trouvent dans la partie nord du tell. Dans la partie sud de la ville, qui correspond à la partie habitée proprement dite, plusieurs longues tranchées de direction est-ouest, larges de 3 à 5 mètres, sont creusées à des intervalles de 100 mètres sur toute la largeur de l'espace intra-muros (de 300 à 900 mètres selon les zones), afin d'avoir une meilleure idée de l'urbanisme et de l'architecture domestique. Si les niveaux des périodes les plus anciennes ne sont explorés qu'en un seul point du site (le temple d'Ishtar), les principaux monuments de l'époque assyrienne et de l'époque parthe sont alors dégagés, ainsi que de nombreuses résidences et des tombes de ces différentes époques, permettant la découverte de nombreuses inscriptions cunéiformes, sur tablettes d'argile ou d'autres supports, et de nombreux objets. La méthode de fouilles d'Andrae, prolongeant celle de son mentor Koldewey, marque un tournant dans l'élaboration d'une archéologie scientifique en Mésopotamie, par la qualité de ses relevés et les informations qu'il tire de ses travaux.
Les différentes trouvailles sont transportées en 1914 à Bagdad, où elles sont partagées avec les autorités ottomanes. Une partie va au musée d'Istanbul, et une autre prend la mer sur un bateau en direction de l'Allemagne, mais est stoppée à Porto lors du début de la Première Guerre mondiale, puis saisie et confiée à un musée local. Andrae réussit à obtenir la restitution des objets en 1926, alors qu'il travaille pour les musées de Berlin, en les échangeant contre des objets provenant de ceux-ci. Quand il prend la tête du département des antiquités orientales (l'actuel Vorderasiatisches Museum), qui occupe les salles du Pergamon Museum, il consacre une aile aux découvertes d'Assur. Les collections orientales furent globalement peu touchées par les destructions et les pillages qui eurent lieu durant la Seconde Guerre mondiale ; la majorité des objets exhumés à Assur furent donc préservés, à quelques exceptions près (l'autel de Tukulti-Ninurta, plusieurs objets en or issus des tombes assyriennes).

Les fouilles ne reprennent à Qalʿat-Sharqat qu'après 1945, sous la conduite d'équipes d'archéologues irakiens, qui effectuent quelques recherches et s'attachent surtout à la préservation du site, puis à la reconstruction de certains monuments à partir de 1978 (une partie de la murailles et de ses portes, la ziggurat, des temples et palais). Des équipes allemandes retournent sur le site en 1988-1989 sous la direction de Reinhard Dittmann, puis en 1989-1990 sous celle de Barthel Hrouda. Interrompues par les conflits, les fouilles reprennent entre 1999 et 2001 sous la direction de l'archéologue irakien Hafidt al-Hayani, rejoint en 2000 et 2001 par des fouilleurs allemands conduits par Peter A. Miglus. Sont en particulier mis au jour des résidences et un palais néo-assyriens, ainsi que des tombes d'époque parthe. Parallèlement, un projet est mis en place à Berlin à partir de 1997, autour de la Freie Universität, la DOG et le Voderasiatische Museum. Appelé Assur-Projekt, il regroupe des épigraphistes et des archéologues, reprend les découvertes archéologiques du début du XXe siècle, et publie des synthèses sur les différents monuments, les résidences, les œuvres d'art et objets divers, ainsi que les fonds d'archives d'Assur qui améliorent considérablement la connaissance du site et de l'Assyrie.
En 2023 de nouvelles fouilles débutent sur le site, sous la direction de Karen Radner et F. Janoscha Kreppner de l'université de Münster. Elle commence par une prospection géomagnétique dans le secteur de la « Ville neuve », où des fouilles sont ensuite entamées.

Les périodes archaïques
Assur au IIIe millénaire av. J.-C.
Le site de Qalʿat-Sharqat semble s'être développé durant la première moitié du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. D'éventuelles occupations antérieures n'ont pu être attestées avec certitude : des fragments de poterie trouvés dans le secteur du temple du dieu Assur (au nord-est du tell) pourraient dater du début du chalcolithique (VIe millénaire av. J.-C.), et d'autres pourraient remonter à la période d'Obeïd (v. 4000 av. J.-C.), mais cela reste sujet à caution. Aucune trace d'occupation n'apparaît pour la période d'Uruk (majoritairement au IVe millénaire av. J.-C.) ou pour celle de Ninive V (fin du IVe millénaire av. J.-C.). Les plus anciennes traces d'une présence permanente ont été mises au jour dans les niveaux anciens du temple d'Ishtar, qui correspondent au milieu du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. et à la phase III de la période des dynasties archaïques du Sud mésopotamien.
Le nom de la ville d'Assur apparaît dans des textes de la période d'Akkad (v. 2340-2150 av. J.-C.), mis au jour à Gasur (Yorghan Tepe, la future Nuzi). Des inscriptions exhumées dans le temple d'Ishtar mentionnent des personnages qui devaient régner sur cette ville, le premier étant un certain Ititi, qui règne vers le XXIIIe siècle av. J.-C. Ce roi commémore un don à la déesse qui consiste en du butin pris après une victoire contre Gasur. C'est sans doute à cette époque qu'Assur passe sous la coupe des rois d'Akkad. Un personnage connu par une inscription dédicatoire, Azuzu, se dit serviteur de Manishtusu d'Akkad (2269-2255) : il s'agit donc probablement d'un gouverneur de cette ville, vassal du roi d'Akkad. Après une éclipse documentaire de près de deux siècles, Assur réapparaît dans la documentation écrite au début du XXIe siècle av. J.-C., alors qu'elle vient d'être soumise par les souverains de la troisième dynastie d'Ur (2112-2004 av. J.-C.). Une inscription votive a été laissée dans le temple d'Ishtar par le gouverneur de la ville, appelé Zarriqum, au temps du roi Amar-Sîn (2046-2038 av. J.-C.. Assur redevient indépendante au moment de la chute du royaume d'Ur, dans les dernières décennies du XXIe siècle av. J.-C.
)

Découvertes archéologiques
Le temple d'Ishtar est le seul édifice qui a livré des niveaux de la période archaïque, même s'il semblerait que le vieux palais ait eu un antécédent dès ces périodes (on y a en tout cas exhumé 14 tablettes de la période d'Akkad). Les fouilleurs du site ont seulement repéré sous le futur temple de Sîn et de Shamash les traces d'une construction qu'ils estiment dater de la période d'Akkad. Une statue acéphale mise au jour à proximité du futur temple d'Anu et d'Adad pourrait également dater de cette époque, ou de celle d'Ur III.
Les quatre niveaux les plus anciens du temple d'Ishtar (notés H à E, du plus ancien au plus récent) sont donc les principales sources d'information sur Assur à l'époque archaïque, que ce soit par l'architecture, l'art et l'épigraphie. Le niveau H semble dater du milieu du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. Le niveau G est mieux connu. Le plan de l'édifice pour cette période a été partiellement reconstitué : l'accès au temple semble se faire par un vestibule, puis une salle allongée du côté nord-ouest, conduisant sur une cour principale autour de laquelle devait s'organiser l'édifice. Juste à l'est se trouve une pièce cultuelle (environ 11 × 6 mètres) disposant de banquettes sur ses côtés, conduisant à la cella sur son côté nord. Dans la salle cultuelle, les archéologues ont mis au jour plusieurs objets rituels, peut-être disposés à l'origine sur les banquettes. Il s'agit notamment de supports cultuels, d'encensoirs, de petits autels en terre cuite en forme de maisons, d'un vase conique en pierre sculpté et de plusieurs statues d'orants : l'une représentant un homme barbu avec une robe à franges, dans un style caractéristique de la période des dynasties archaïques, une autre statue acéphale d'un personnage assis sur un trône, une autre représentant une femme debout, et une tête de femme (le reste de la statue manque) d'une belle qualité d'exécution. Ces figurines étaient sans doute déposées de façon à être en présence de la statue de la déesse, et devaient se substituer aux fidèles qu'elles représentaient, de sorte que leurs prières soient adressées en permanence à la divinité.

Les époques assyriennes
Historique
Période paléo-assyrienne
Au début du IIe millénaire av. J.-C., le contexte démographique de la Haute Mésopotamie évolue avec l'arrivée de populations amorrites et hourrites, qui prennent la tête d'entités politiques et font de la région un ensemble morcelé politiquement. Certains souverains plus puissants que d'autres tentent d'exercer leur hégémonie sur ces territoires. Les rois d'Assur ne sont clairement pas de ceux-là, puisqu'ils n'affirment pas dans leurs inscriptions avoir fait des conquêtes militaires, mais commémorent seulement leurs constructions dans la ville, qui a donc un statut de « Cité-État ». Assur se distingue par le dynamisme de ses marchands, qui mettent en place un réseau commercial à longue distance très florissant. C'est en particulier le cas avec l'Anatolie, où ils implantent plusieurs comptoirs aux XIXe et XVIIIe siècles. Ils y échangent de l'argent et de l'or contre des étoffes produites dans les ateliers de leur ville, souvent par leurs épouses restées à Assur, et de l'étain importé d'Iran. L'activité commerciale est documentée par des milliers de tablettes cunéiformes, retrouvées sur le site de Kültepe, l'ancienne Kanesh, en Cappadoce. Ces tablettes constituent l'essentiel de la documentation sur Assur pour cette période, avec les fouilles archéologiques. Celles-ci ont dégagé les niveaux du palais royal, des temples d'Assur et d'Ishtar, mais aussi des sépultures. On parle pour cette époque de « période paléo-assyrienne ».

La ville est gérée par un ensemble d'institutions originales, constitué d'un conseil d'Anciens, d'un magistrat chargé de l'administration (le līmum), et d'un roi appelé iššiakku, « vicaire ». Ce souverain est considéré avant tout comme le représentant du dieu Assur, le véritable roi des Assyriens. Le roi a manifestement un rôle plus limité que ceux des autres souverains de l'époque. Les rois paléo-assyriens forment au XIXe siècle av. J.-C. une dynastie, dont le fondateur semble être Puzur-Assur Ier sur lequel on ne sait pas grand chose. Erishum Ier (v. 1974-1935) est la principale figure de cette période : il semble avoir joué un grand rôle dans l'essor commercial de la cité. Il entreprend d'importants travaux dans le temple du dieu Assur, et restaure les murailles de la ville. Cependant, la puissance commerciale d'Assur connaît un arrêt vers 1835, et une trentaine d'années plus tard la ville perd son indépendance, après sa conquête par un roi amorrite, Samsi-Addu d'Ekallatum. La tradition assyrienne ultérieure a intégré ce roi parmi les souverains légitimes d'Assur, sous le nom assyrien de Shamshi-Adad Ier (1807-1775). Dans les faits, Assur n'était qu'une ville parmi d'autres du royaume de Samsi-Addu (que les historiens désignent comme « Royaume de Haute Mésopotamie »). Mais cette époque marque un renouveau du commerce avec l'Anatolie, et d'importants travaux sont entrepris dans le palais royal et le temple du dieu Assur. À Samsi-Addu succède son fils Ishme-Dagan (v. 1775-1735), qui perd rapidement le puissant royaume de son père, en se soumettant à l'autorité du roi Hammurabi de Babylone. Celui-ci mentionne Assur parmi les villes de son royaume dans son célèbre Code de lois .
La période qui suit est mal connue. La ville a manifestement un poids politique faible et ses réseaux commerciaux se sont effondrés. Le fils d'Ishme-Dagan, Asinum, est déposé par un certain Puzur-Sîn, originaire d'Assur, qui se vante dans une inscription d'avoir chassé une dynastie d'origine « étrangère » (amorrite). Mais le royaume d'Assur se dote d'une nouvelle dynastie, fondée par un certain Abasi. La succession royale durant les deux siècles suivants est connue essentiellement par des listes royales plus tardives, ce qui nous empêche d'en savoir plus sur la situation politique de la ville à cette époque obscure. Assur reprend apparemment de l'importance vers 1500, sous les règnes d'Assur-nerari Ier, qui mentionne dans plusieurs inscriptions la rénovation des temples et des murailles , et de son fils Puzur-Assur III, qui restaure également des temples et, selon une inscription postérieure aurait étendu la muraille pour englober le secteur de la « Ville neuve ». Sur le plan politique, il conclut un accord sur les frontières avec le roi Burna-Buriash Ier de Babylone. Ce traité place les limites de son royaume dans la région moyenne du Tigre, ce qui indique une expansion de la puissance d'Assur. Les années suivantes, marquées par au moins une crise de succession, sont plus difficiles pour l'Assyrie, qui fait face à la montée en puissance du royaume hourrite du Mittani. Celui-ci parvient à la placer sous sa coupe, au plus tard vers la fin du XVe siècle av. J.-C. On sait par ailleurs qu'un roi du Mittani nommé Shaushtatar a pris et pillé Assur, mais cet événement est difficile à situer dans le temps.

Période médio-assyrienne
La première moitié du XIVe siècle av. J.-C. voit le royaume d'Assur prendre de l'importance, pour finalement se soustraire à la tutelle du Mittani et rivaliser avec les rois de Babylone, qui avaient également des visées sur elle. Sous l'impulsion d'Assur-uballit Ier (1365-1330), Assur devient alors une des puissances majeures du Moyen-Orient, durant cette période que les historiens qualifient de « médio-assyrienne » (v. 1365-934). Le royaume sort du cadre limité de la cité-État, puisqu'on parle désormais de « pays d'Assur », l'Assyrie. La ville devient une capitale politique de premier plan, dont les souverains y accomplissent de nombreux travaux de construction, à commencer par un palais royal et des temples. La richesse des élites assyriennes se remarque également par la présence d'archives et de tombes opulentes exhumées dans ses quartiers résidentiels. La puissance assyrienne s'affirme en particulier sous les règnes d'Adad-nerari Ier (1308-1275), de Salmanazar Ier (1275-1245) et de Tukulti-Ninurta Ier (1244-1208), qui joignent à leurs succès militaires de grands programmes de construction. Le premier renforce les murailles de la ville et ses quais, restaure les temples d'Assur et d'Ishtar et plusieurs portes. Le second entreprend à son tour des travaux dans les sanctuaires et le palais, tandis que le troisième érige le nouveau palais et reconstruit le temple d'Ishtar selon un plan différent . Il fonde une nouvelle ville royale à 3 kilomètres d'Assur, sur la rive opposée du Tigre, qu'il nomme « Port de Tukulti-Ninurta », Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta. C'est la première fondation d'une nouvelle capitale dans l'histoire assyrienne ; son existence fut pourtant de courte durée puisque le site fut délaissé après la mort, par assassinat, de son fondateur.
Le XIIe siècle av. J.-C. voit la puissance assyrienne connaître un retrait. Il n'y a pas de traces de travaux d'importance à Assur avant les règnes d'Assur-resh-ishi Ier (1133-1116) et surtout de Teglath-Phalasar Ier (1114-1076), le dernier des grands rois médio-assyriens. C'est de cette époque que date en particulier la reconstruction du double temple d'Anu et d'Adad, avec ses ziggurats jumelles. Le royaume assyrien connaît ensuite un déclin marqué, notamment face à la progression de groupes d'Araméens qui s'installent en Haute-Mésopotamie. Ces populations fondent plusieurs royaumes en Syrie où les Assyriens avaient auparavant établi leur domination. Les inscriptions royales se font de plus en plus rares à partir de la fin du XIe siècle av. J.-C., et l'activité de construction à Assur semble très limitée.

Période néo-assyrienne
Les rois d'Assur ne parviennent à rétablir leur puissance que progressivement, à partir de la seconde moitié du Xe siècle av. J.-C. qui marque le début de la période dite « néo-assyrienne » (934/911-609 av. J.-C.). La puissance des grands rois médio-assyriens est à nouveau égalée sous le règne d'Assurnasirpal II (883-859). Ce monarque entreprend des travaux dans le vieux palais, avant de transférer sa capitale dans la vieille cité de Kalkhu (site de l'actuelle Nimroud), située en amont sur le Tigre, sur la rive gauche. On ne sait pas vraiment ce qui a présidé à ce choix. Une raison souvent avancée est qu'Assur, par sa situation sur la rive droite du Tigre, aurait été trop exposée à d'éventuelles attaques araméennes venues de l'ouest, mais pour autant que l'on sache cette menace n'était pas d'actualité à ce moment-là. La cité reste néanmoins capitale religieuse du pays, car elle dispose du seul temple dédié au dieu national Assur, qui conserve toute son importance dans l'idéologie du royaume. Plusieurs rois, à commencer par Assurnasirpal II, sont enterrés dans le vieux palais. Ses anciens monuments sont toujours restaurés, parfois avec d'importants remaniements. Salmanazar III (858-824) reconstruit le temple d'Ishtar, ainsi que celui d'Anu et d'Adad, et fait peut-être aussi bâtir le « Palais est » dégagé lors des dernières campagnes de fouilles.

La puissance assyrienne continue à croître dans les décennies qui suivent, pour aboutir à la fin du VIIIe siècle av. J.-C. à la constitution d'un véritable empire. La capitale se déplace à nouveau : après Kalkhu, ce sont successivement Dur-Sharrukin et Ninive qui ont les faveurs des souverains. Assur n'est pas délaissée pour autant, surtout en raison de son statut religieux : les rois y résident plusieurs semaines au printemps pour les principales festivités religieuses, et ils continuent de s'y faire inhumer. Sennachérib (704-681) entreprend ainsi un grand programme de travaux en lien avec le culte d'Assur, qu'il cherche à promouvoir de plus en plus face au grand dieu rival de Babylone, Marduk, tout en reprenant des éléments du culte de ce dernier. Il fait ainsi ériger un temple destiné à la fête-akitu à l'ouest des murailles d'Assur, à l'image du temple similaire qui existe à Babylone. Il agrandit le temple principal du dieu Assur, reconstruit sans doute aussi celui des dieux Sîn et Shamash, et fait construire deux palais au sud-est de la ville pour deux de ses fils, dont le « Palais princier » qui a été dégagé. Le caractère sacré d'Assur se retrouve par ailleurs dans un texte, l'« Annuaire divin d'Assur » (Götteradressbuch), qui énumère les divinités vénérées dans la ville, et donne les noms cérémoniels de ses portes, remparts, voies cérémonielles et surtout de ses temples.
Le sanctuaire du dieu Assur est à nouveau restauré par Assarhaddon (680-669) et Assurbanipal (668-627). Après le règne de ce dernier, l'Assyrie est secouée par une guerre civile, dont sort vainqueur Sîn-shar-ishkun (627-612). Celui-ci fait reconstruire le temple d'Ishtar et y adjoindre un sanctuaire dédié au dieu Nabû. Les archéologues ont également dégagé de nombreuses résidences, avec des archives et des sépultures de cette période.

La guerre civile est suivie d'un conflit avec deux anciens vassaux de l'Assyrie, les Babyloniens et les Mèdes, qui parviennent en quelques années à pénétrer au cœur du territoire assyrien. En 614, Assur est prise par une armée mède. Les fouilles ont montré que la ville s'est manifestement préparée à l'assaut, qui n'a donc pas été une attaque surprise. Elles ont également montré que les vainqueurs ne se sont pas contentés de la piller, mais ont aussi entrepris d'importantes destructions, notamment celle du sanctuaire d'Assur et des palais. L'empire assyrien s'effondre dans les années qui suivent.

Période post-assyrienne
Rien n'indique clairement si Assur a fait l'objet d'une occupation importante dans les deux siècles qui ont suivi cette destruction. Quelques textes la mentionnent peut-être, mais ils sont fragmentaires, ce qui empêche d'être sûr qu'il s'agisse bien de cette ville : un texte trouvé à Sippar pourrait indiquer qu'Assur a eu un gouverneur babylonien ; le Cylindre du roi perse Cyrus II semble indiquer que ce roi a rendu au temple d'Assur la statue du dieu qui avait été enlevée par les Babyloniens lors de la prise de la ville ; Xénophon, dans son évocation du périple des Dix Mille (vers 401 av. J.-C.), mentionne une ville « grande et prospère » nommée Caenae, que l'on identifie couramment avec Assur. L'archéologie est loin de documenter une reprise importante du peuplement de la ville. Seuls deux petits sanctuaires accolés sont attribués à cette période, ainsi que des tombes et un petit trésor de bijoux en argent trouvé sur le site du Palais neuf, qui présente une ressemblance avec l'art achéménide. En particulier, la nature du « Temple A », érigé sur les ruines du sanctuaire d'Assur, a fait l'objet de nombreuses discussions, notamment sur l'époque de sa fondation. Selon les auteurs, elle est datée soit des années qui suivent la destruction de 614, soit de la période achéménide, soit de la période hellénistique. On y a trouvé des inscriptions royales et des décrets royaux des périodes antérieures de l'histoire assyrienne, y compris des documents issus d'autres temples, qui ont été réunis là à partir de monuments antiques de la ville alors en ruines, ce qui a fait que cet édifice a été vu comme un « lieu de mémoire » des temps post-assyriens.

Organisation générale de la ville
Aux époques assyriennes, la ville d'Assur est une cité d'au moins 80 hectares, dont la majeure partie est protégée par une muraille et subdivisée en deux grands ensembles.
La « ville intérieure » (en assyrien libbi āli, « cœur de la ville » ; on trouve parfois mention d'une « ville haute », ālu ele, dans les textes antiques, et « vieille ville » dans les écrits modernes), est la zone la plus anciennement habitée, autour d'un espace couvrant une quarantaine d'hectares. Elle est située sur un éperon rocheux qui s'élève sur 30 à 40 mètres dans sa partie haute, selon la tradition des villes de Haute Mésopotamie, dont le centre se trouve généralement sur une hauteur, pour des raisons vraisemblablement défensives. Sur son côté oriental coule le Tigre (qui circule du Nord au Sud) et sur son côté nord un ancien bras du Tigre canalisé (d'Est en Ouest), formant un coude qui borde deux côtés de la ville. Le dénivelé est particulièrement marqué sur la partie haute de l'éperon qui donne sur les cours d'eau, constituant un ravin. Les eaux risquant de menacer la ville intérieure, en particulier du côté nord directement exposé au cours du Tigre, un mur protecteur la protégeait et devait être couramment entretenu en raison de l'érosion fluviale. Il était complété par endroits par des canaux de drainage servant à évacuer les eaux. Des cours d'eau temporaires (wadis) partaient également du cœur de la ville. Sur ses côtés ouest et sud, qui ne bénéficiaient pas de protections naturelles et qui donnaient directement sur la plaine semi-aride, la ville intérieure et ses contrebas (environ 65 hectares) était entourée d'une muraille au tracé semi-circulaire, au moins dès le début du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. Une muraille antérieure avait probablement existé au millénaire précédent. Un profond fossé, large de 20 mètres et profond peut-être de 15, fut creusé à ses pieds, sans doute sous le règne de Tukulti-Ninurta Ier au XIIIe siècle av. J.-C. Il a pu aussi servir de canal entre les deux bras du Tigre. Le rempart a été doublé et agrandi dans le troisième quart du IXe siècle av. J.-C., sous le règne de Salmanazar III. Il comprenait des tours de défense espacées d'une trentaine de mètres.

La ville intérieure abrite les monuments principaux, situés dans sa partie nord le long de la falaise : l'angle nord-est, l'éperon rocheux à proprement parler, comprend le sanctuaire principal de la cité, dédié au dieu Assur. Plus à l'est se trouvent d'autres temples, ainsi que les palais royaux : le vieux palais, qui date de la première moitié du IIe millénaire av. J.-C., et le nouveau palais, qui date de la fin du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. D'autres monuments importants de cette zone sont les portes intra-urbaines, mentionnées dans de nombreuses inscriptions royales mais difficiles à localiser précisément, comme celle appelée mušlālu, près du temple d'Assur (ou dans son complexe). Localisés sur la partie la plus haute du site, dominant la plaine alentour, ces monuments devaient être visibles de loin. La partie sud de la ville intérieure comprend la zone résidentielle, moins bien connue car moins explorée par les archéologues, qui y ont néanmoins dégagé de nombreuses habitations de l'époque néo-assyrienne. Durant cette même époque, l'espace résidentiel privé s'est étendu vers le nord, puisque le nouveau palais a disparu et qu'à la place se trouvent des résidences cossues. De cette époque datent également des palais situés en dehors de la zone monumentale traditionnelle, le Palais ouest et le Palais princier. L'urbanisme du quartier résidentiel, connu par les fouilles, est caractérisé par des rues étroites et tortueuses. Mais les inscriptions mentionnent également l'existence de voies processionnelles, sans doute plus larges et régulières, ainsi que celle de vergers. Le long du Tigre, se trouvent des espaces appelés le « quai » (kāru), qui devaient comprendre le port de la cité, et également le quartier des échanges.
La ville s'est par la suite étendue vers le sud, en contrebas. C'est la « ville nouvelle » (ālu eššu) qui peut correspondre au moins en partie à la « ville basse » (ālu šaplē) évoquée dans quelques textes. S'étendant sur plus de 15 hectares, sa fonction exacte n'est pas connue car elle n'a pas été de fouillée. Elle fut englobée dans la muraille de la cité, peut-être dès le milieu du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. ; la muraille aurait été construite par Puzur-Assur III selon une inscription d'Adad-nerari Ier. Au-delà s'étendaient des plaines fertiles, au Sud, et de l'autre côté du fleuve, au Nord et à l'Est, l'Ouest étant une zone de steppe.

Le temple et le culte du dieu Assur
Si Assur n'est plus la capitale politique de l'Assyrie après le IXe siècle, elle demeure toujours sa capitale religieuse même après la fin de l'Empire, car leur dieu et souverain Assur y a son domicile terrestre. Ainsi, la cité conserve une grande importance pour les rois assyriens, dont le pouvoir est légitimé par Assur, leur maître. Les souverains résident d'ailleurs toujours une partie de l'année à Assur pour accomplir les lourdes tâches de leur fonction religieuse, car ils sont aussi les grands prêtres du dieu. Ils n'ont d'ailleurs pas cherché à ériger de nouveaux temples pour ce dieu dans leurs nouvelles capitales, tellement son culte était attaché à celui de la ville homonyme.
À l'origine, le dieu Assur semble être la divinisation de la ville d'Assur, ou peut-être plus précisément celle de son promontoire rocheux, le culte des monts étant quelque chose de courant dans la Haute Mésopotamie antique. La personnalité de ce dieu s'est enrichie avec l'essor politique de l'Assyrie en prenant les aspects des autres divinités souveraines de la Mésopotamie, en premier lieu Enlil, le roi des dieux, auquel il est régulièrement assimilé. Au début du VIIe siècle av. J.-C., ce furent les aspects de la personnalité du grand dieu babylonien Marduk qui furent repris, sous le règne de Sennachérib qui transposa des éléments du culte de Babylone à Assur, notamment la fête du Nouvel An.

Le temple principal d'Assur est situé au sommet de l'éperon rocheux de la ville intérieure, qui domine le reste du site et la plaine alentour. Les inscriptions de fondation les plus anciennes indiquent qu'il a été construit dans la seconde moitié du XXe siècle av. J.-C., sous le règne d'Erishum Ier, dont le nom cérémoniel est « Taureau sauvage » (en akkadien rimum). Il fut reconstruit vers 1800 par Shamshi-Adad Ier, qui dans ses inscriptions le considère comme un temple d'Enlil et lui donne le nom cérémoniel de « Maison-taureau sauvage des pays » (en sumérien é-am-kurkurra). Les archéologues n'ont pas pu identifier un stade antérieur à ces époques. Le temple est alors un édifice d'environ 110 mètres sur 54, orienté sud-ouest/nord-ouest. Il est constitué d'une première unité bâtie au sud-ouest autour d'une petite cour. La position centrale de l'édifice est occupée par un autre ensemble de pièces organisées autour d'une cour plus vaste, de 37 mètres sur 31. Celle-ci donne sur son côté nord-est sur une porte conduisant à la cella transversale, qui abritait la statue du dieu. Sur le côté sud-est du temple se trouvait une cour de forme trapézoïdale, protégée par une enceinte d'environ 70 mètres sur 170 pour ses côtés les plus longs . Le temple a été plusieurs fois reconstruit sous les rois médio-assyriens, en particulier sous Salmanazar Ier, après que l'édifice a été ravagé par un incendie. Quand Assur fut assimilé au dieu Enlil, on donna au sanctuaire les noms officiels du grand temple d'Enlil à Nippur, à savoir la « Maison de la totalité » (en sumérien é-šarra) et la « Maison-montagne » (é-kur). La cella du temple porte quant à elle le nom de « Maison-montagne des pays » (é-hursag-kurkurra). La dernière grande rénovation du temple a eu lieu sous le règne de Sennachérib, qui y a ajouté une nouvelle unité au nord-est avec sa propre cella.

En plus d'être un lieu de culte majeur, le temple d'Assur occupait également une place importante dans la vie politique de l'Assyrie, le souverain n'étant que l'administrateur terrestre du territoire et de sa population, qui dépendait en dernier lieu du dieu Assur. Le temple était donc perçu comme la demeure du véritable maître de l'Assyrie et de son empire. C'est pour cette raison que les souverains s'y faisaient couronner. Un hymne daté du règne d'Assurbanipal semble d'ailleurs se rapporter à ce rituel, ou sinon à un autre qui associe royauté et divinité, comme celui du Nouvel An. Il proclame que « Assur est roi », démonstration claire de la conception de la royauté en Assyrie. En symbole de leur allégeance au grand dieu, toutes les provinces du royaume contribuaient à tour de rôle aux offrandes faites au dieu, comme le documente un important corpus d'archives du XIe siècle av. J.-C. mis au jour dans le temple. Ce système continue aux périodes suivantes. Les souverains étrangers qui étaient vassaux des Assyriens étaient également tenus de manifester leur soumission au dieu Assur : ils devaient verser un tribut pour son temple, et y étaient parfois conduits en personne pour prêter un serment (mamītu) de loyauté envers le dieu et son pays.
L'une des fonctions du temple d'Assur, surtout aux époques anciennes, est également juridique. Les procédures judiciaires se tiennent dans le complexe d'Assur ou à proximité, ce qui expliquerait les découvertes de textes juridiques dans le sanctuaire.
Le temple d'Assur possédait également une bibliothèque, datée de l'ère néo-assyrienne mais contenant des textes de l'époque précédente, qui comprenait une grande variété de textes : rituels (notamment divinatoires), listes lexicales, textes juridiques (dont les Lois assyriennes et les Édits de harem), textes littéraires. Les scribes chargés de recopier et archiver les textes (des prêtres du temple) avaient mis au point des tablettes d'inventaires classant les textes en fonction de leur catégorie (par exemple les hymnes). D'autres documents de nature administrative relatifs à la gestion du temple et de son culte ont été mis au jour dans le temple.
À l'ouest du temple d'Assur, une grande ziggurat dont la base carrée mesurait environ 60 mètres de côté était érigée, sans doute depuis le règne de Shamshi-Adad Ier. Elle présentait la particularité, parmi les ziggurats assyriennes, d'être une construction isolée et de ne pas être accolée à un temple. Fortement érodée après la chute de la ville en 614, puis transformée en forteresse à l'époque parthe, elle est mal connue. On ignore ainsi comment se faisait l'accès au sommet de l'édifice en l'absence d'escaliers extérieurs apparents. Son nom officiel était « Maison-montagne de l'Univers » (é-aratta-kišarra).
Lors de la rénovation des bâtiments d'Assur et de la modification de son culte, Sennacherib ajoute un édifice destiné à être intégré dans les rituels du dieu, le Bīt Akītu, situé à l'extérieur des murailles de la ville intérieure, au nord-ouest ; il reprend ainsi le modèle, déjà présent à Babylone, d'un édifice servant de point d'arrivée de la procession de statues divines lors du rituel du Nouvel An (akītu). Il était relié au temple d'Assur par une voie processionnelle qui traversait le secteur des temples et des palais et franchissait la muraille par la porte de Tabira. C'était un édifice bordé de jardins (on y a retrouvé des traces d'irrigation), organisé autour d'une cour intérieure. Celle-ci donnait sur un portique conduisant à une vaste salle transversale d'une trentaine de mètres de long, sans doute la cella de l'édifice destinée à l'assemblée des statues divines.

Les autres temples
Le texte de l’Annuaire divin d'Assur donne les noms d'une quarantaine de sanctuaires de la ville, certains étant apparemment des chapelles, dédiés aux principales divinités du panthéon assyrien en plus d'Assur : Ea, Ninurta, diverses hypostases d'Ishtar (de Ninive et d'Arbèles, la « Reine flamboyante » Šarrat niphi), Anu, Adad, Shamash, Sîn, Nabû, Gula, Marduk, etc. Les autres temples mis au jour lors des fouilles sont situés dans le quartier sacré, au nord de la ville intérieure, surplombant le Tigre. La particularité de deux de ces édifices est d'être conçus au moment de leur construction comme des temples doubles dédiés conjointement à deux divinités.
Le plus ancien est le temple double dédié à Sîn et à Shamash, respectivement les dieux de la lune et du soleil. Il fut construit vers le milieu du IIe millénaire sous Assur-nerari Ier, à la place d'un édifice antérieur dont l'organisation est inconnue. Il s'agit alors d'un temple organisé de façon symétrique, autour d'une grande cour intérieure ouvrant sur une grande porte sur son côté nord-ouest. Les deux sanctuaires étaient situés chacun du côté opposé de celle-ci (côtés nord-est et sud-ouest) et constitués d'une ante-cella barlongue ouvrant sur une cella oblongue, bordées de pièces annexes. L'édifice est reconstruit vers le XIIIe siècle av. J.-C., peut-être par Tukulti-Ninurta Ier, apparemment sans grand changement, mais ce niveau est mal connu. Il est reconstruit au début de l'époque néo-assyrienne, peut-être sous Assurnasirpal II, avec une orientation et un plan différents, et une taille agrandie. Selon les reconstitutions des archéologues, problématiques en raison du très mauvais état de conservation du bâtiment, l'entrée est déplacée au nord du bâtiment. Elle ouvre sur une grande cour protégée par une enceinte et conduit aux deux sanctuaires disposés désormais côte-à-côte. Une dernière reconstruction de l'édifice, attribuable à Sargon II ou Sennacherib, a été identifiée mais elle est encore moins bien connue que la précédente.
Plus imposant est le temple double dédié à Anu, dieu céleste, et à Adad, dieu de l'Orage, situé le long du rempart nord entre le Vieux Palais et le Nouveau Palais, reconstruit complètement par Teglath-Phalasar Ier. Le roi commémore cela par des inscriptions portées sur des dalles de l'édifice et dans celle figurant sur un prisme en argile mis au jour dans l'édifice (qui concerne plus largement ses conquêtes militaires et constructions). Il affirme dans ces documents que l'édifice antérieur remonte au règne de Shamshi-Adad III (XVIe siècle av. J.-C.). Cet édifice d'environ 100 × 84 mètres est organisé autour d'une grande cour murée, dont l'entrée principale se trouvait sur le côté sud-ouest, ouvrant sur les bâtiments cultuels disposés symétriquement sur le côté nord-est, ceux de droite semblant dédiés à Anu, et ceux de gauche à Adad. Au centre, deux sanctuaires jumeaux constitués de deux antichambres menant à une longue pièce prolongée par une niche servant de cella. La spécificité de l'édifice est surtout qu'elle disposait de deux ziggurats jumelles dont les bases à peu près carrées mesuraient environ 36,50 × 35 mètres de côté. Elles étaient disposées aux extrémités de l'édifice, dont l'accès au sommet se faisait sans doute depuis le toit des temples, suivant un principe qui se retrouve ailleurs en Haute Mésopotamie (par exemple à Tell Rimah). Le temple fut restauré à plusieurs reprises, notamment sous Salmanazar III qui procéda à de plus amples transformations, réduisant la taille des ziggurats (environ 24 × 21,30 mètres de base) tout en conservant l'organisation générale du complexe.
Ishtar est une autre divinité majeure d'Assur, dont le culte est attesté depuis les périodes les plus anciennes de la cité. Son sanctuaire fut reconstruit plusieurs fois, d'abord à l'époque d'Ur III par le gouverneur Zarriqum, puis à l'époque paléo-assyrienne par le roi Ilushuma, puis encore à l'époque médio-assyrienne par Adad-nerari Ier. Tukulti-Ninurta Ier entreprend des travaux plus ambitieux : il détruit le vieil édifice et en construit un nouveau un peu plus au nord, d'environ 51 × 39 mètres au sol, qu'il dédie à la déesse Ishtar d'Assur (Aššurītu) et à une déesse secondaire appelée Dinitu. Le sanctuaire se présente alors avec une ante-cella barlongue ouvrant sur une cella elle-même barlongue, avec un podium sur son petit côté droit, entouré par d'autres salles parallèles. Le souverain a fait par ailleurs ériger un autel le représentant en bas-relief qui fut retrouvé dans l'édifice. Le temple est à nouveau reconstruit à un autre emplacement (au nord-est du précédent) sous Assur-reshi-ishi et Tiglath-Phalasar Ier à la fin du XIIe siècle av. J.-C., mais cette construction est mal connue : elle semble plus petite que la précédente. Elle devient le sanctuaire principal des différentes manifestations d'Ishtar à Assur. Salmanazar III au IXe siècle av. J.-C. aménage dans ce complexe un temple pour la déesse Šarrat niphi, un aspect d'Ishtar qui signifie quelque chose comme « Reine flamboyante » en assyrien, dont les traces sont difficiles à identifier.
À la fin de l'époque néo-assyrienne, Sin-shar-ishkun érige un sanctuaire dédié à Nabû, le dieu de la sagesse, à l'emplacement du temple d'Ishtar de l'époque de Tukulti-Ninurta et attenant à celui d'Assur-resh-ishi qui est encore actif. L'édifice mesure 68,5 × 50 mètres et est organisé autour de deux grandes cours. La seconde, située au sud, ouvre sur deux lieux saints jumeaux, consacrés à Nabû et à sa parèdre Tashmetu. Chacun est constitué d'une ante-cella barlongue et d'une cella oblongue, terminée par un podium se situant au fond de la pièce dans l'axe de son entrée. Des pièces annexes et deux longs couloirs bordent les cellae, suivant une disposition qui se retrouve dans d'autres temples assyriens, notamment à Dur-Sharrukin.

Les textes, en particulier la Topographie d'Assur, indiquent par ailleurs que d'autres lieux de la ville étaient investis d'un caractère sacré. C'est le cas des portes situées sur les murailles extérieures de la ville ou à l'intérieur de celle-ci. Plusieurs textes mentionnent en particulier une porte appelée mušlālu(m), mais dont l'emplacement précis est inconnu. Certains textes la rattachent en effet au secteur du temple du dieu Assur, et d'autres au vieux palais ; peut-être se trouve-t-elle entre les deux. Cette porte est mentionnée sur plusieurs inscriptions, entre l'époque paléo-assyrienne et l'époque néo-assyrienne, évoquant ses nombreuses restaurations et indiquant qu'il s'agit d'un lieu important. Un texte du roi Erishum y fait résider un groupe de sept divinités garantes de la justice, ce qui semble en faire un lieu d'exercice de la justice.

Les palais
Le plus ancien palais d'Assur est le « Vieux Palais », situé à l'ouest du complexe sacré du dieu Assur. Les archéologues ont identifié trois grandes phases de cet édifice, qui couvre toutes les périodes assyriennes. Les niveaux les plus récents ont été érodés, et la succession de reconstructions ne permet pas de bien connaître le plan de l'édifice :

Le plus ancien niveau bien connu, qui semble succéder à des édifices plus anciens (peut-être de l'époque d'Akkad, et du XXe siècle av. J.-C., le soi-disant « bâtiment à cour de graviers », Schotterhofbau), correspond à une construction du XIXe siècle av. J.-C. généralement attribuée à Shamshi-Adad Ier (Ur-plan, « Plan originel », dans la terminologie des fouilleurs). Il s'agit d'un édifice quadrilatère, de dimensions approximatives 112 × 98 mètres, comprenant quelque 172 salles, dont six vastes cours, dont le plan semble remarquablement pensé et a servi de base aux phases suivantes. La cour principale, accessible depuis une entrée au nord, organisait peut-être l'espace officiel.
Ce palais est ensuite rasé sous Puzur-Sîn vers 1700 av. J.-C. Il est reconstruit à l'époque médio-assyrienne, peut-être dès Assur-nerari Ier vers 1500. Mais l'état le mieux connu pour cette époque semble correspondre aux reconstructions d'Adad-nerari Ier vers 1300 av. J.-C. Si l'entrée et la cour principale sont disposées à l'identique du niveau ancien, le reste de l'édifice a un plan moins régulier que le précédent, à commencer par ses contours qui ne semblent pas réguliers sur son côté sud. La cour principale semble conduire vers le sud-ouest à une grande pièce ouvrant apparemment sur la salle du trône, tandis que le côté nord-ouest, organisé autour d'une autre cour intérieure, pourrait avoir servi d'espace privé, préfigurant l'organisation classique des palais néo-assyriens, autour d'une zone privée et d'une zone publique séparées par une salle du trône. La partie orientale, moins bien restituée, semble aussi comporter des appartements privés, peut-être aussi des espaces de réception. On a retrouvé dans la partie sud-est la tombe souterraine du roi Assur-bel-kala Ier (1074-1056).
Le palais est reconstruit par Assurnasirpal II (883-859). Le plan de l'édifice, qui conserve la cour principale et également une cour orientale, est encore moins bien connu que ceux des périodes précédentes. C'est peut-être avec lui que s'affirme la forme classique des palais néo-assyriens, bien connue par le palais du même Assurnasirpal II à Kalkhu, érigé peu après. Des fragments de créatures androcéphales ailées (lamassu) qui ont été retrouvés dans cet édifice pourraient indiquer que c'est le premier palais assyrien à en avoir représenté, dès cette époque, avant celui de Kalkhu. Le vieux palais est en tout cas restauré à plusieurs reprises par les souverains assyriens, qui bien qu'ils n'aient plus Assur pour capitale y résident périodiquement, notamment pour des cérémonies religieuses. Plusieurs rois assyriens continuent à se faire enterrer dans l'édifice, où on a mis au jour les tombeaux souterrains (pillés dès l'Antiquité) d'Assurnasirpal II, Shamshi-Adad V, Assarhaddon, et deux autres tombes non attribuées ; on sait par ailleurs que Sennachérib s'y est également fait inhumer, mais l'emplacement n'a pas été retrouvé.

Le « Nouveau Palais » fut bâti plus tard au nord-ouest de la citadelle par Tukulti-Ninurta Ier (1244-1207), sur une vaste terrasse d'environ 29 000 m2. Son nom officiel était « Maison du Roi, Seigneur des Pays » (en sumérien é-lugal-umun-kur-kur-ra). Il n'en reste quasiment rien, l'édifice ayant été abandonné et rasé dès l'époque néo-assyrienne pour être remplacé par des habitations ; son existence n'est connue que par des inscriptions qui commémorent sa construction . Quelques objets ont été trouvés à sa surface, notamment des fragments de frises en ivoire qui devaient faire partie de meubles.
Le « Palais princier », daté du règne de Sennachérib qui l'a fait construire pour le prince héritier, a été érigé au sud-est de la ville. Peu exploré, son plan n'a pas été bien restitué, d'autant plus qu'il est localisé sur le rivage du Tigre et que l'érosion fluviale a largement détérioré ses ruines.
Les fouilles irakiennes qui ont eu lieu entre 1999 et 2001 sur le site ont dégagé un quatrième palais d'époque néo-assyrienne, au sud de la ziggurat et aux abords d'un quartier résidentiel et commercial. Il a été désigné comme le « Palais est ». La date de sa fondation est incertaine, le plus probable étant qu'il faille l'attribuer à Salmanazar III (858-824), ce que semble indiquer une inscription qui y a été retrouvée. Les archéologues ont identifié ses quartiers résidentiels au nord, avec notamment des pièces d'eau et un système élaboré de canalisations, et des salles de réception dans sa partie sud, qui semble avoir eu un étage si l'on en juge par l'épaisseur plus importante de ses murs.

Les résidences
Les fouilles de W. Andrae n'ont pas concerné seulement les bâtiments officiels, mais aussi des résidences privées. Cela a été fait en ouvrant plusieurs tranchées larges d'environ 5 mètres dans les parties centrale et méridionale de la ville intérieure, et couvrant à peu près la largeur de celle-ci. Cette méthode n'a permis d'explorer entièrement qu'un nombre limité d'habitations. L'espace résidentiel le mieux connu est celui qui a remplacé le nouveau palais et s'est étendu en direction du temple d'Ishtar, dans la partie nord de la ville, à l'époque néo-assyrienne. Il a livré le quartier résidentiel le plus complet de l'Assyrie antique, puisque ce sont en tout environ 80 habitations qui ont été mises au jour. Elles sont disposées dans des quartiers très densément peuplés, desservis par des rues étroites et au tracé irrégulier.
On peut schématiquement distinguer deux types d'habitations, suivant leur taille et leur organisation interne :

les maisons de petite taille, généralement constituées d'une suite de quatre à six pièces alignées, aux fonctions sans doute diverses (en tout cas difficilement déterminables par l'archéologie), dépassant rarement la cinquantaine de mètres carrés habitables au sol ;
les maisons à cour ou espace central, plus vastes (dans les 120 m2 habitables en moyenne) et comprenant en moyenne une dizaine de pièces, parfois jusqu'à trente. Elles sont agencées autour d'un espace central couvert ou non, ce qui est souvent difficile à déterminer. Leurs pièces ont en général une fonction précise : pièces d'eau, magasins, cuisines, salles de réception. Elles ont sans doute un étage où se trouvaient les chambres à coucher.
Les contrats de vente de la période néo-assyrienne retrouvés dans les résidences d'Assur (ainsi que de Ninive) permettent de compléter nos connaissances sur les fonctions des pièces des grandes résidences. Les habitations fouillées sont généralement des maisons fermées sur l'extérieur, l'accès au réseau de rues de la ville se faisant par une sorte d'impasse appelée la « sortie » (mūṣû). Les textes évoquent également la cour intérieure (tarbaṣu) organisant la circulation dans l'édifice, ainsi que le « lieu où l'on se couche » (bēt mayāli, peut-être un ensemble de pièces). Ils mentionnent l'existence d'un étage, la « maison haute » (en sumérien é-anita ou é-nim), ainsi que d'autres parties servant de magasins, d'ateliers, de salles d'eau, d'étables, etc. Des termes au sens plus difficile à déterminer semblent concerner les salles d’apparat.

Archives et société
Plusieurs de ces résidences ainsi que des bâtiments administratifs ont livré des archives de nature publique et privée offrant des renseignements sur leurs occupants et leurs activités, économiques avant tout, datées des époques médio- et néo-assyriennes. Ces archives étaient conservées dans une pièce de la résidence, souvent celle sous laquelle se trouvaient les sépultures familiales (voir plus bas), parfois dans des jarres de terre cuite. Les différents lots de tablettes et fragments provenant des premières campagnes de fouilles d'Assur, dont l'origine est bien renseignée par les rapports des archéologues les ayant mis au jour mais qui n'ont pas été intégralement publiés, ont fait l'objet d'un important travail de répertoriage et classification par O. Pedersén.
Quelques tablettes administratives datables par des critères paléographiques de l'époque d'Akkad (autour du XXIIIe siècle av. J.-C.) ont été mises au jour sous le Vieux palais.

La période paléo-assyrienne n'est quasiment pas documentée par des textes provenant d'Assur, hormis les inscriptions royales (aucune archive identifiée, quelques tablettes isolées ou dans des niveaux postérieurs), mais elle est néanmoins plutôt bien connue grâce aux archives provenant de Kültepe, l'ancienne Kanesh, située en Anatolie centrale, l'un des corpus de textes les plus importants du Proche-Orient ancien. D'une vingtaine de milliers de tablettes, il est surtout constitué de lettres et de contrats produits par les activités des familles de marchands d'Assur qui viennent commercer en Anatolie pour y importer de l'étain venu d'Iran ou d'Asie centrale et des étoffes contre de l'argent (et aussi de l'or). Ce corpus comprend de nombreuses lettre provenant d'Assur, envoyées par les représentants des firmes de marchands ou bien les épouses de marchands assyriens installés en Anatolie, qui offrent donc un aperçu de la société d'Assur à cette période. Sont notamment documentées les structures familiales des marchands Assyriens, qui prennent souvent une épouse secondaire en Anatolie le temps de leur séjour (qui peut durer plusieurs années), tout en laissant la position d'épouse principale à leur femme restée à Assur (rares étant celles qui accompagnent leur mari), et la position d'héritiers principaux à ses enfants assyriens. Les fils de marchands apprennent le métier en accompagnant des expéditions commerciales, puis en s'occupant de « branches » de la firme familiale dans une ville anatolienne, et l'aîné prend la direction des affaires à la mort de son père. Les épouses et filles des marchands restées à Assur s'occupent de la gestion des affaires courantes de la maisonnée, et tiennent au courant le chef de maison des éventuels problèmes importants qui se présentent pour la famille. Elles produisent des étoffes qui sont vendues sur place ou exportées en Anatolie, car elles constituent un produit prisé dans ce pays. Certaines épouses de marchand peuvent se comporter en véritables femmes d'affaires. La maison des familles de marchands située à Assur est un des centres de l'activité de la famille, aux côtés de celle de Kanesh voire d'autres villes d'Anatolie ; on y trouve des magasins et ateliers en lien avec l'activité de la famille. Les marchands reviennent souvent à Assur au bout de plusieurs années, notamment pour s'occuper de leurs parents âgés. Les textes indiquent également que la famille royale, les prêtres d'Assur et d'autres hauts dignitaires sont impliqués dans le commerce. Certains marchands s'enrichissent au point d'intégrer le groupe des élites dirigeant la ville. Assur est à cette époque organisée suivant le modèle de la cité-État, dans lequel le roi a un pouvoir limité par la « Ville » (ālum), terme qui recouvre un ensemble d'institutions urbaines assurant l'administration de la cité : l'« Hôtel de Ville » (bēt alim) qui est le centre de son activité, une assemblée (puḫrum) de notables ou d'Anciens, un magistrat désigné pour un an, le līmum, qui dispose de son propre bureau lui permettant de gérer certains affaires courantes, notamment la fiscalité, également des messagers ayant une fonction d'ambassadeur temporaire, dépêchés en Anatolie, en particulier pour y gérer les affaires diplomatiques (des traités étant passés avec les royaumes anatoliens, essentiellement pour les affaires commerciales). Le recours à l'écrit est courant dans le milieu des marchands, ce qui indique une « alphabétisation » plutôt élevée pour une période aussi reculée, reposant sur un répertoire limité de signes cunéiformes, entre 150 et 200, essentiellement phonétiques.

Reflets du statut de capitale de royaume de premier plan que prend la ville à l'époque médio-assyrienne, des lots d'archives de l'époque documentent les activités publiques et privées (souvent entremêlées) de familles de dignitaires (six lots identifiés par Pedersén). Celles qui documente les activités de Kidin-Adad et d'autres personnes des bonnes familles d'Assur (143 tablettes, surtout du XIVe siècle av. J.-C.), documentent la mise en exploitation des campagnes situées à l'ouest de la ville au moment de l'expansion du royaume et de son enrichissement : les élites urbaines font des prêts à des familles de paysans, qui mettent en gage leurs terres (antichrèse) ; ces textes donnent un aperçu du monde agricole de l'époque, et des pratiques juridiques concernant les propriétés rurales, qui peuvent être mises en parallèle avec les Lois assyriennes, datant de la même période. Celles de la famille du gouverneur Urad-Sherua (85 tablettes essentiellement du XIIIe siècle av. J.-C.), qui comprend plusieurs personnages ayant occupé des charges importantes dans l'administration, notamment le gouvernement de provinces, contient des documents privés (prêts, achats, inventaires) et d'autres en lien avec l'administration des provinces dont Urad-Sherua a la charge. L'archive de Babu-aha-idinna (plus de 80 tablettes et fragments du XIIIe siècle av. J.-C.), l'un des plus importants personnages de son temps, mise au jour dans sa tombe, comprend des documents juridiques et des lettres offrant une image vivante de la manière dont étaient gérées les affaires économiques d'une famille de l'élite assyrienne de l'époque, qui dans ce cas au moins sont très variées, puisque la maisonnée était active dans la production de textile, de cuir, d'objets en bois (dont des arcs et des chariots), en pierre, en métal, d'huile parfumées, de vins, de miel, et employait des marchands pour les écouler, y compris dans des régions lointaines (Canaan).

D'autres lots concernant plus directement les activités d'institutions (cinq lots identifiés par Pedersén). Le plus important en quantité (environ 650 textes, datés surtout de la première partie du règne de Teglath-Phalasar Ier) provient du temple d'Assur (les tablettes étaient disposées dans des jarres d'une pièce de la cour du complexe) et documente le fonctionnement du système des offrandes (ginā'ū) en aliments et boissons destinées au dieu, sous le contrôle d'un superviseur, Izbu-leshir pour la période la mieux documentée. Il s'agit surtout de textes administratifs, notamment des listes et des comptes en tables enregistrant les offrandes. Chacune des provinces fournit des produits (répartis en quatre catégories : céréales, sésame, miel, fruits) qui sont ensuite stockés et transformés par le temple. Une autre archive provenant d'un bâtiment administratif situé entre le temples de Sin et Shamash et celui d'Ishtar (plus de 400 tablettes et fragments éparpillés, allant de 1273 à 1056 av. J.-C.). Elles documentent les activités d'un bureau dirigé par un intendant (AGRIG/abarakku, onze connus par les textes sur la période), et consistent là aussi pour l'essentiel en listes et tables enregistrant les biens confiés à ce service, à savoir des matériaux bruts, des animaux, des produits agricoles, des minerais, aussi des produits finis, destinés à approvisionner le palais royal. Une autre archive d'une centaine de textes documente le bureau d'un administrateur chargé de l'engraissement des animaux (ša kurulti'e), nommé Mutta (une centaine de tablettes écrites sur une période de douze mois), travaillant pour le compte de Ninurta-tukul-Assur, un membre de la famille royale qui exerce au moment des archives la fonction de régent pour le roi Assur-dan Ier (1178-1133 av. J.-C.). Il s'agit d'animaux offerts par des dignitaires et autres personnages importants du royaume qui souhaitent obtenir une audience auprès du régent, que le responsable du bureau prend en charge et confie à des personnes qui les font paître avant leur abattage ou une autre destination. Les animaux sont en effet destinés à être servis à la table du palais, ou offerts en présent à des personnes (notamment des artisans et des exorcistes servant le palais), ou encore destinés à des rituels religieux, mais beaucoup vont nourrir les lions et lionceaux gardés dans le palais royal.
L'époque néo-assyrienne (surtout le VIIe siècle av. J.-C., les décennies précédant la destruction de la ville) a également livré des lots de tablettes privées, répartis en une trentaine de lieux de trouvaille selon les conclusions de Pedersén, documentant en particulier les prêts, les achats de biens immobiliers et d'esclaves, et diverses autres activités juridiques des familles aisées, à côté de quelques bibliothèques. Par exemple une famille d'orfèvres, dont le plus important personnage est Nabû-zeru-iddina, qui travaillait pour le compte du temple du dieu Assur et effectuait d'autres activités économiques, disposant d'un patrimoine conséquent. La documentation fournit avant tout des informations sur la population urbaine d'Assur impliquée dans l'artisanat, organisés de manière collective dans des entités appelés qinnu (traduit par « guilde » ou « fraternité »), et qui se sont peut-être vues assigner des champs pour leur entretien (ce qui expliquerait la présence de villages/hameaux nommés d'après des professions artisanales dans l'arrière-pays d'Assur, à moins qu'il ne faille y voir des lieux spécialisés dans ces métiers). Un autre lot documente les activités de Duri-Assur, un négociant en vins, qui dispose d'une résidence de 150 m2 au centre de la ville, depuis laquelle il conduit ses affaires. Avec trois partenaires, il organise le transport de vin produit dans l'actuel Djebel Sinjar (une des principales régions viticoles de la Haute Mésopotamie antique), en faisant appels aux fonds de nombreux petits investisseurs qui reçoivent du vin en contrepartie. Ce commerce profite du fait que la ville d'Assur dispose d'une franchise de taxes commerciales. Ces différents lots de tablettes font par ailleurs apparaître des personnes d'origine étrangère, avant tout des personnes venant des pays sémitiques occidentaux, en particulier des Araméens (plusieurs tablettes étant écrites dans leur langue, qui devient au VIIe siècle av. J.-C. la plus parlée en Assyrie même), mais aussi des personnes venant de plus loin, comme des Mèdes et des Égyptiens. C'est manifestement en bonne partie le produit de la politique de déportation conduite de façon répétée par l'Assyrie, mais cela n'empêche pas certaines de ces familles de disposer d'une vie confortable à Assur. Beaucoup ont en revanche des conditions de vie moins enviables, à l'image d'une esclave élamite déportée et vendue avec sa fille à la suite de la défaite de son pays en 645 av. J.-C..

Vie intellectuelle
Pour l'époque paléo-assyrienne, les traces d'une vie intellectuelle à Assur sont très limitées, seules quelques tablettes mises au jour à Kültepe permettant d'approcher ce sujet. Quand la ville devient la capitale d'un royaume de premier plan à l'époque médio-assyrienne, elle devient progressivement un foyer intellectuel dynamique, surtout à partir du XIIIe siècle av. J.-C., et se construit en grande partie en suivant le modèle culturel venu de Babylone, qui dispose d'une ancienneté et d'un prestige inégalés dans le Proche-Orient de cette période. Il en ira de même pour les périodes suivantes, durant lesquelles les lettrés assyriens s'inspirent constamment de la culture babylonienne. Des scribes babyloniens sont employés à la cour assyrienne, et lors des campagnes conduites en Babylonie des tablettes savantes sont prises et emportées à Assur, ce qui permet d'accélérer ces transferts culturels et de constituer des bibliothèques contenant les principales œuvres savantes de la tradition mésopotamienne à Assur, qui ne sont pas simplement copiées mais font également l'objet d'adaptations et de modifications. Les textes commémorant les hauts faits des rois assyriens, qui deviennent de plus en plus élaborés, témoignent de la créativité des lettrés de ce pays. Les sources de la période ne permettent néanmoins pas d'en savoir beaucoup sur les lettrés assyriens de l'époque. Ils se succèdent de père en fils, formant des dynasties de savants, mais leur arrière-plan familial est généralement inconnu au-delà d'une ou deux générations. De même leurs rapports avec le pouvoir ne sont pas directement documentés. Il semble cependant évident qu'ils jouent dès cette époque un rôle crucial auprès du roi et que les principaux devins et exorcistes d'Assur, chargés de l'aider dans ses communications avec le divin et sa protection face aux menaces surnaturelles, sont proches de lui et disposent donc d'une position éminente dans la société, similaire à celles des savants documentés pour l'époque suivante par les archives de Ninive. Ils ont alors fait d'Assur un centre intellectuel de premier plan, qui tente de rivaliser avec Babylone.
Les textes savants sont alors pour beaucoup des textes rituels pratiques servant à l'activité courante des lettrés, en premier lieu des tablettes divinatoires, une des principales activités des savants de la Mésopotamie antique (qui sont pour la plupart des membres du clergé), des textes d'exorcismes, et d'autres textes rituels divers, aussi des hymnes, des prières, notamment en rapport avec la vie de la cour royale. Viennent ensuite des listes lexicales, des traités médicaux et pharmacologiques, des textes de lois (en particulier les Lois assyriennes), des textes mathématiques, astronomiques, aussi des textes en rapport avec l'élevage des chevaux, la confection de parfums. La plupart des tablettes savantes ont été mises au jour dans un secteur du temple du dieu Assur, dans des niveaux néo-assyriens, qui comprenaient une soixantaine de textes savants datant de l'époque médio-assyrienne et conservés là plusieurs siècles après leur rédaction. Cela a laissé supposer (à la lumière de l'exemple plus tardif de la « Bibliothèque d'Assurbanipal » de Ninive) qu'on y trouvait à l'origine une bibliothèque médio-assyrienne, qui aurait pu être créée à l'initiative de Tukulti-Ninurta Ier après sa prise de Babylone et l'emport de textes savants depuis cette cité. Mais un certain nombre de ces textes semble aussi provenir, au moins à l'origine, de bibliothèques privées. En l'état actuel des connaissances il n'y a pas de preuve évidente qu'une bibliothèque officielle ait été créée sur une initiative royale à cette période. Le Vieux palais a également livré six textes savants qui pourraient provenir de la bibliothèque d'un exorciste au service de la cour à la fin de la période médio-assyrienne.
Durant l'époque néo-assyrienne, la création de nouvelles capitales royales à Nimroud et Ninive s'accompagne de la constitution d'importants centres intellectuels dans ces lieux, les principaux lettrés étant au service des rois et donc de façon préférentielle hébergés à la cour. Mais Assur reste une cité importante en raison de son statut de ville sainte, et s'y trouvent des lettrés au statut important, qui ont laissé des fonds d'archives mis au jour lors des fouilles. 
Le groupe de textes mis au jour dans le temple d'Assur d'où proviennent les textes savants médio-assyriens mentionnés ci-dessus comprend plus largement environ 300 textes, et peut-être bien plus encore, répartis entre des textes savants et d'autres relevant d'une archive concernant les activités cultuelles du temple. Le Palais du prince a également livré des tablettes savantes aux côtés d'archives (au moins 90 tablettes, dont des textes exorcistiques).
Des six bibliothèques privées identifiées à Assur pour la période néo-assyrienne, la plus remarquable est de loin celle de l'exorciste Kisir-Assur et de sa famille (dont son neveu Kisir-Nabû). Elle comprend près de 1 200 tablettes et fragments de tablettes, essentiellement à caractère rituel (recueils d'incantations et de prescriptions médicales servant pour les exorcismes), avec les textes essentiels de la tradition exorcistique mésopotamienne, mais aussi des textes de prières, des listes lexicales, des textes historiques, etc.. L'analyse des textes de cette bibliothèque et de celles de Ninive indiquent que leurs savants étaient en relations constantes, permettant une circulation des textes et savoirs entre les centres religieux et intellectuels d'Assyrie.

Les tombes privées
Les fouilles des quartiers résidentiels d'Assur ont également livré plusieurs tombes privées. Les familles enterraient couramment leurs morts dans des chambres funéraires souterraines situées sous leurs résidences, une pratique funéraire qui impliquait un culte ancestral associant les vivants et les morts d'un même lignage. Deux de ces sépultures, en particulier, ont livré un riche matériel archéologique, illustrant la richesse qu'ont pu accumuler certains notables d'Assur au IIe millénaire av. J.-C.
La première est la tombe no 20, d'époque paléo-assyrienne et située à l'est du temple d'Anu et d'Adad. Elle se distingue par le fait qu'il s'agit d'une simple fosse rectangulaire d'environ 1,9 × 1,3 mètre. Les ossements étaient dans un état de dégradation avancé au moment de l'exhumation, mais le matériel funéraire était particulièrement riche. Il comprenait de la vaisselle en céramique, en cuivre et en bronze, des armes (dague, pointe de lance), et surtout des éléments de parure : quatre diadèmes en or, des boucles d'oreilles en or, des anneaux en or et divers autres ornements en or et en pierres semi-précieuses, notamment des colliers, de petites figurines animales en plomb et bronze, des sceaux-cylindres, etc. Certains objets témoignent de contacts avec le monde anatolien, ce qui est cohérent avec le fait que la tombe date de l'époque de l'essor des réseaux commerciaux d'Assur vers cette région.
La seconde tombe remarquable est la no 45, d'époque médio-assyrienne et localisée au sud-ouest du temple d'Ishtar. Il s'agit d'une chambre souterraine voûtée dans laquelle on accédait par un puits vertical recouvert de dalles de calcaire. Elle semble avoir appartenu à la famille d'un personnage éminent du royaume, Babu-aha-idinna, dont des tablettes ont été mises au jour à proximité. Elle a servi durant une longue période, puisque les restes d'une dizaine d'individus y ont été identifiés. Le matériel funéraire qui y a été retrouvé consiste en de la vaisselle en céramique, en albâtre (22 vases, certains sculptés), en ivoire (peigne, épingle, pyxide gravé de motifs floraux et animaux) et des bijoux en or et en pierres semi-précieuses. Une partie du trésor a été perdue depuis l'excavation de la tombe .

Les rangées de stèles
Un ensemble d'environ 140 stèles de pierre a été mis au jour entre les murailles de la ville haute et celles de la ville neuve. Elles étaient regroupées sur plusieurs emplacements disposés sur une centaine de mètres, désignés par Andrae comme des « rangées de stèles » (Stelenreihen). Ces stèles sont de forme rectangulaire et ont un sommet arrondi. Les mieux conservées d'entre elles présentent des « images » (ṣalmu) ou portent des inscriptions précisant la commande d'un souverain ou d'un haut dignitaire assyrien. Les stèles des souverains sont regroupées au nord, celles des dignitaires au sud, entre plusieurs groupes d'époques différentes. La plus ancienne date du règne d'Eriba-Adad Ier (1390–1364), la plus récente est celle d'une épouse d'Assurbanipal (668-630). Le sens de ce regroupement de stèles n'est pas connu. Pour Andrae, il s'agirait d'une sorte de calendrier : les stèles royales indiqueraient la succession des règnes, celles des dignitaires la succession des dignitaires éponymes (les Assyriens dataient les années d'après des noms de dignitaires « éponymes », limmu, de l'année). Mais cela supposerait que de nombreuses stèles aient disparu, puisqu'il en faudrait environ 700 pour couvrir toute la période concernée. Pour P. Miglus, il s'agirait plutôt d'un regroupement effectué après que les stèles aient été sorties d'un temple où elles étaient conservées. C'est là une fonction courante des « images » de hauts personnages, leurs représentations figurées devant une statue divine ayant pour but de lui adresser perpétuellement des prières. En effet selon la conception mésopotamienne une « image » n'est pas une simple représentation d'une personne, car elle contient une part de l'essence de la personne qu'elle représente.

L'époque parthe
Un nouvel essor
À partir du Ier siècle ap. J.-C., Assur connaît un renouveau, après une longue période durant laquelle elle ne fut pratiquement pas occupée ; les traces d'occupation pour la période séleucide sont en effet très éparses. Entre le Ier siècle et le IIIe siècle, Assur redevient une cité importante, tandis qu'elle s'étend sur environ 55 hectares. Les fouilles ont mis au jour plusieurs édifices notables : la partie nord-est du tell reste consacrée au sanctuaire du dieu Assur, tandis que le secteur palatial occupe le centre de la ville, entouré d'habitations. Des nécropoles ont été exhumées au sud-ouest de la ville, en dehors du quartier résidentiel.
Assur est alors probablement dirigée par une dynastie locale, comme l'indiquent certaines inscriptions qui mentionnent un personnage portant le titre de marja, « Seigneur ». Dans la cité voisine et contemporaine de Hatra, ce nom désigne le potentat local. Le peu d'inscriptions qui furent trouvées sur place ne nous apprend pas grand chose sur la situation de la ville à cette époque. On ignore le nom qu'elle portait alors et il est impossible d'en reconstituer l'histoire. Les grandes évolutions de celle-ci sont connues par des sources extérieures, relatives aux conflits entre Romains et Parthes, puis Sassanides, qui se disputent la Haute Mésopotamie et qui concernent surtout Hatra, alors la principale cité de la région. L'architecture, l'art et la religion d'Assur présentent un profil similaire à ceux de Hatra. Elles reprennent l'héritage de la Mésopotamie antique tout en montrant des évolutions propres à l'époque parthe : en particulier la présence d'iwans, des salles de réception ouvertes par une grande porte en forme d'arc, caractéristiques de la Mésopotamie et de l'Iran de cette période. L'ouverture aux influences grecque et romaine se reconnaît dans des édifices à colonnades.
La destruction des deux cités semble d'ailleurs survenir au même moment, lorsque les Perses sassanides emmenés par leur roi Shapur Ier envahissent le nord de la Mésopotamie, dans les années 230-240, après avoir vaincu les Parthes et chassé les Romains.

Les sanctuaires
Le secteur des sanctuaires de l'époque parthe est inclus dans une enceinte intérieure délimitant l'espace sacré (temenos), sur 250 mètres de long et 100 à 200 mètres de large selon les endroits. L'ancienne ziggurat, qui borde ce temenos à l'ouest, est peut-être reconvertie en forteresse. Les différents édifices de ce secteur de la ville parthe étaient en très mauvais état au moment des fouilles du début du XXe siècle, ne permettant pas de restituer leur état antique de façon satisfaisante.
Sur l'emplacement de l'ancien temple d'Assur, un nouveau sanctuaire est érigé dans le courant du IIe siècle. Les graffiti qui y ont été retrouvés indiquent qu'il est toujours consacré à la divinité locale, désormais appelée Asor, et à sa parèdre Sherua. Le temple possède sa propre enceinte intérieure, qui disposait sans doute à l'origine d'arcades. La façade du sanctuaire, disposée sur le côté nord de la cour, comprend trois iwans rapprochés ouvrant sur l'esplanade principale. Cette disposition est similaire à celle du grand temple de Hatra, son contemporain, caractéristique de l'architecture parthe. Les inscriptions du sanctuaire sont datées des fêtes principales de l'ancien calendrier cultuel assyrien, qui a donc été préservé après la chute de cet empire.
Plus au sud dans l'enceinte sacrée se trouve le temple A, peut-être dédié à Héraclès (assimilé en Mésopotamie du Nord à l'ancien dieu de Enfers, Nergal). Son plan suit le modèle traditionnel mésopotamien, constitué d'un vestibule et d'une cella disposés en largeur (barlongs). Un autre sanctuaire situé à l'est du temenos, le temple périptère, doit son nom à son organisation architecturale d'inspiration gréco-romaine : il est entouré sur trois côtés par des colonnades, et possède une façade à grande ouverture.

Le palais
Le palais d'époque parthe, sans doute érigé au Ier siècle, est probablement la résidence des « Seigneurs » d'Assur. Il est organisé autour d'une vaste cour dont chacun des quatre côtés comprend un iwan, celui du côté sud étant le plus élevé. Les façades de cette cour ont pu être reconstituées grâce à l'étude des fragments de briques cuites recouvertes de stuc qui l'ornaient. Chacun des arcs principaux ouvrant sur un iwan était encadré de trois rangées de petites colonnes et d'entablements, ainsi que de petites entrées voûtées au niveau du sol, auxquelles correspondaient aux étages supérieurs des niches aveugles. Chacun des quatre iwans ouvre sur des groupes de pièces formant des unités indépendantes du reste de l'édifice, ce qui confère à la cour principale un rôle essentiel pour la circulation dans l'édifice. La partie nord de l'édifice comprend une vaste salle centrale à quatre piliers séparant trois espaces voûtés, et semble constituer le cœur de l'édifice palatial. Sur le côté est de l'édifice, une salle péristyle d'inspiration hellénistique pourrait avoir servi d'entrée monumentale.

Les résidences
Les résidences d'Assur à l'époque parthe se distinguent de celles des époques antérieures par la présence d'iwans donnant sur une cour intérieure, généralement ouverts au nord, sans doute pour offrir de l'ombre et de la fraîcheur durant la saison chaude. Certaines habitations possèdent également un second iwan du côté sud de la cour. Un quartier artisanal comprenant des fours à céramique a également été identifié lors des fouilles.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Civilisation assyrienne
(en) Karen Radner, Ancient Assyria : A Very Short Introduction, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2015
(en) Eckart Frahm (dir.), A Companion to Assyria, Malden, Wiley-Blackwell, 2017
(en) John M. Russell, « Assyrian Cities and Architecture », dans Eckart Frahm (dir.), A Companion to Assyria, Malden, Wiley-Blackwell, 2017, p. 423-452

Introductions sur Assur
(en) Roland W. Lamprichs, « Aššur », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 1, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 225-228
Laura Battini et Pierre Villard, « Aššur (ville) », dans F. Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, 2001, p. 99-102

Synthèses
(de) Walther Andrae, Das wiedererstandene Assur, Munich, C. H. Beck, 1977
(en) Prudence O. Harper, Evelyn Klengel-Brandt, Joan Aruz et Kim Benzel, Assyrian Origins : Discoveries at Ashur on the Tigris, New York, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1995 (lire en ligne)
(de) Joachim Marzahn et Beate Salje (dir.), Wiedererstehendes Assur : 100 Jahre deutsche Ausgrabungen in Assyrien, Mayence, Philipp von Zabern, 2003
(de) Johannes Renger (dir.), Assur : Gott, Stadt, Land, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz Verlag, coll. « Colloquien der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft, Bd. 5 », 2011

Autres études
Stefan R. Hauser, « Hatra et Assur : Centres religieux et commerciaux », Dossiers d'archéologie, no 334 « Hatra : Site irakien en danger »,‎ juillet-août 2009, p. 72-77
(en) Olof Pedersén, Archives and libraries in the city of Assur : A Survey of the Material from the German Excavations, Uppsala, Almqvist & Wiksell, 1985-1986 (2 t.)
(en) A. Kirk Grayson, The Royal inscriptions of Mesopotamia. Assyrian periods Vol. 1 : Assyrian Rulers of the Third and Second Millennium B.C. (To 1115 B.C.), Toronto, Buffalo et Londres, University of Toronto Press, 1987
(en) John Nicholas Postgate, Bronze Age Bureaucracy : Writing and the Practice of Government in Assyria, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2013

Annexes
Articles connexes
Période paléo-assyrienne
Kültepe

Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

(de) Assur sur le site de l'Université d'Heidelberg
(de + en) Site présentant les fouilles récentes à Assur.
(en) Karen Radner & Jamie Novotny, « Neo-Assyrian Archival Texts from Assur », sur Neo-Assyrian Archival Texts from Assur, The ATAE/Assur Project, a sub-project of MOCCI, 2022 (consulté le 22 février 2022)

 Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de l’Irak   Portail du patrimoine mondial   Portail de la Mésopotamie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 261
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Ashur
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Assur is an ancient Assyrian ruin in Northwestern Iraq. In the Bronze Age, it was an important trade hub. The city remained continuously inhabited for over 4000 years, but was abandoned in the 14th century after the residents were massacred by the Timurid Empire.
Assur has been a  UNESCO World Heritage Site since 2003, as a reaction to plans to submerge parts of the archaeological site underwater in a dam project. The project was put on hold following protests of the international community.

## Get in
Assur is off Highway 1, that runs between Baghdad and Mosul. From Mosul, the distance is about 140 km. Nearest town is Al-Shirqat.

## Get around
Due to its relatively small size, you could (in safer times) get around on foot quite easily.

## See
Due to the unstable security situation on site, the architectural heritage has not been assessed by experts since Assur was overrun by terrorists in 2015. The current status of the structures below is therefore unknown. Do not assume they are still intact nor that they can be visited.
35.459743.26111 Assur Ziggurat.    (updated Nov 2020)
35.457443.25852 Temple of Nabu.    (updated Nov 2020)
Royal Tombs. (updated Nov 2020)

## Stay safe
Parts of the archaeological site were reportedly demolished in 2015 by terrorists using explosives, and some of these unexploded devices may still be around. Do not stray from marked foot paths.

## Go next
In safer times, Hatra and Mosul would have been next on many travelers' itineraries, but as of 2019 they are very dangerous and best avoided.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
NIMRUD
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:34:22


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 3,379
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nimrud
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nimrud (; Syriac: ܢܢܡܪܕ Arabic: النمرود) is an ancient Assyrian city (original Assyrian name Kalḫu, biblical name Calah) located in Iraq, 30 kilometres (20 mi) south of the city of Mosul, and 5 kilometres (3 mi) south of the village of Selamiyah (Arabic: السلامية), in the Nineveh Plains in Upper Mesopotamia. It was a major Assyrian city between approximately 1350 BC and 610 BC. The city is located in a strategic position 10 kilometres (6 mi) north of the point that the river Tigris meets its tributary the Great Zab. The city covered an area of 360 hectares (890 acres). The ruins of the city were found within one kilometre (1,100 yd) of the modern-day Assyrian village of Noomanea in Nineveh Governorate, Iraq.
The name Nimrud was recorded as the local name by Carsten Niebuhr in the mid-18th century. In the mid 19th century, biblical archaeologists proposed the Assyrian name Kalḫu (the Biblical Calah), based on a description of the travels of Nimrod in Genesis 10.
Archaeological excavations at the site began in 1845, and were conducted at intervals between then and 1879, and then from 1949 onwards. Many important pieces were discovered, with most being moved to museums in Iraq and abroad. In 2013, the UK's Arts and Humanities Research Council funded the "Nimrud Project", directed by Eleanor Robson, whose aims were to write the history of the city in ancient and modern times, to identify and record the dispersal history of artefacts from Nimrud, distributed amongst at least 76 museums worldwide (including 36 in the United States and 13 in the United Kingdom).
In 2015, the terrorist organization Islamic State announced its intention to destroy the site because of its "un-Islamic" Assyrian nature. In March 2015, the Iraqi government reported that Islamic State had used bulldozers to destroy excavated remains of the city. Several videos released by ISIL showed the work in progress. In November 2016, Iraqi forces retook the site, and later visitors also confirmed that around 90% of the excavated portion of city had been completely destroyed. The ruins of Nimrud have remained guarded by Iraqi forces ever since. Reconstruction work is in progress.

History
Kalhu was located on a prosperous route and was built of an earlier business community under Shalmaneser I in the 13th century BC. Through the centuries, it was in disrepair. In the 9th century BC Ashurnasirpal II ordered the removal of debris from the towers and walls and began the construction of a capital of the Neo-Assyrian Empire. This city would have a royal mansion of superior size, larger than previous monarchs'. 
In addition to enormous city walls 7.5 kilometers (4.6 miles) long, palaces, temples, royal offices and various residential buildings, Ashurnasirpal also established botanical gardens, filled with foreign plants brought back from his wide-ranging campaigns, and a zoo, perhaps the first large zoo ever constructed. Ashurnasirpal's inscriptions offer no motive for changing the capital. Various explanations have been proposed by modern scholars, including that he might have gotten disenchanted with Assur since there was little room left in the ancient capital to leave a mark, the important position of Nimrud in regard to local trade networks, that Nimrud was more centrally located in the empire, or that Ashurnasirpal hoped for greater independence from the influential great families of Assur.
A grand opening ceremony with festivities and an opulent banquet in 864 BC is described in an inscribed stele discovered during archeological excavations. To celebrate the completion of his work in Nimrud in 864 BC, Ashurnasirpal hosted a grand celebration, which some scholars have described as perhaps the greatest party in world history; the event hosted 69,574 guests, including 16,000 citizens of the new capital and 5,000 foreign dignitaries, and lasted for ten days. Among the food and beverage used, Ashurnasirpal's inscriptions record 10,000 pigeons, 10,000 jugs of beer, and 10,000 skins of wine, among countless other items.
By 800 BC Nimrud had grown to 75,000 inhabitants making it the largest city in the world. The kings of Assyria continued to be buried in Assur, but their queens were buried in Kalhu. 
Kalhu is known today as Nimrud because the archaeologists of the 19th and 20th centuries gave it that name, believing it was the legendary city of the biblical Nimrod, which is mentioned in the Book of Genesis.
King Ashurnasirpal's son Shalmaneser III (858–823 BC) continued where his father had left off. At Nimrud he built a palace that far surpassed his father's. It was twice the size and it covered an area of about 5 hectares (12 acres) and included more than 200 rooms. He built the monument known as the Great Ziggurat, and an associated temple.
Nimrud remained the capital of the Assyrian Empire during the reigns of Shamshi-Adad V (822–811 BC), Adad-nirari III (810–782 BC), Queen Semiramis (810–806 BC), Adad-nirari III (806–782 BC), Shalmaneser IV (782–773 BC), Ashur-dan III (772–755 BC), Ashur-nirari V (754–746 BC), Tiglath-Pileser III (745–727 BC) and Shalmaneser V (726–723 BC). Tiglath-Pileser III in particular, conducted major building works in the city, as well as introducing Eastern Aramaic as the lingua franca of the empire, whose dialects still endure among the Christian Assyrians of the region today.
However, in 706 BC Sargon II (722–705 BC) moved the capital of the empire to Dur Sharrukin, and after his death, Sennacherib (705–681 BC) moved it to Nineveh. It remained a major city and a royal residence until the city was largely destroyed during the fall of the Assyrian Empire at the hands of an alliance of former subject peoples, including the Babylonians, Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, Scythians, and Cimmerians (between 616 BC and 599 BC).

Later geographical writings
Ruins of a similarly located Assyrian city named "Larissa" were described by Xenophon in his Anabasis in the 5th century BC.
A similar locality was described in the Middle Ages by a number of Arabic geographers including Yaqut al-Hamawi, Abu'l-Fida and Ibn Sa'id al-Maghribi, using the name "Athur" (meaning Assyria) near Selamiyah.

Archaeology
Early writings and debate over name
Nimrud
The name Nimrud in connection with the site in Western writings was first used in the travelogue of Carsten Niebuhr, who was in Mosul in March 1760. Niebuhr 

In 1830, traveller James Silk Buckingham wrote of "two heaps called Nimrod-Tuppé and Shah-Tuppé... The Nimrod-Tuppé has a tradition attached to it, of a palace having been built there by Nimrod".
However, the name became the cause of significant debate amongst Assyriologists in the mid-nineteenth century, with much of the discussion focusing on the identification of four Biblical cities mentioned in Genesis 10: "From that land he went to Assyria, where he built Nineveh, the city Rehoboth-Ir, Calah and Resen".

Larissa / Resen
The site was described in more detail by the British traveler Claudius James Rich in 1820, shortly before his death. Rich identified the site with the city of Larissa in Xenophon, and noted that the locals "generally believe this to have been Nimrod's own city; and one or two of the better informed with whom I conversed at Mousul said it was Al Athur or Ashur, from which the whole country was denominated."
The site of Nimrud was visited by William Francis Ainsworth in 1837. Ainsworth, like Rich, identified the site with Larissa (Λάρισσα) of Xenophon's Anabasis, concluding that Nimrud was the Biblical Resen on the basis of Bochart's identification of Larissa with Resen on etymological grounds.

Rehoboth
The site was subsequently visited by James Phillips Fletcher in 1843. Fletcher instead identified the site with Rehoboth on the basis that the city of Birtha described by Ptolemy and Ammianus Marcellinus has the same etymological meaning as Rehoboth in Hebrew.

Ashur
Sir Henry Rawlinson mentioned that the Arabic geographers referred to it as Athur. British traveler Claudius James Rich mentions, "one or two of the better informed with whom I conversed at Mosul said it was Al Athur or Ashur, from which the whole country was denominated."

Nineveh
Prior to 1850, Layard believed that the site of "Nimroud" was part of the wider region of "Nineveh" (the debate as to which excavation site represented the city of Nineveh had yet to be resolved), which also included the two mounds today identified as Nineveh-proper, and his excavation publications were thus labeled.

Calah
Henry Rawlinson identified the city with the Biblical Calah on the basis of a cuneiform reading of "Levekh" which he connected to the city following Ainsworth and Rich's connection of Xenophon's Larissa to the site.

Excavations
Initial excavations at Nimrud were conducted by Austen Henry Layard, working from 1845 to 1847 and from 1849 until 1851. Following Layard's departure, the work was handed over to Hormuzd Rassam in 1853-54 and then William Loftus in 1854–55.
After George Smith briefly worked the site in 1873 and Rassam returned there from 1877 to 1879, Nimrud was left untouched for almost 60 years.
A British School of Archaeology in Iraq team led by Max Mallowan resumed digging at Nimrud in 1949; these excavations resulted in the discovery of the 244 Nimrud Letters. The work continued until 1963 with David Oates becoming director in 1958 followed by Julian Orchard in 1963.

Subsequent work was by the Directorate of Antiquities of the Republic of Iraq (1956, 1959–60, 1969–78 and 1982–92), the Polish Centre of Mediterranean Archaeology University of Warsaw directed by Janusz Meuszyński (1974–76), Paolo Fiorina (1987–89) with the Centro Ricerche Archeologiche e Scavi di Torino who concentrated mainly on Fort Shalmaneser, and John Curtis (1989). In 1974 to his untimely death in 1976 Janusz Meuszyński, the director of the Polish project, with the permission of the Iraqi excavation team, had the whole site documented on film—in slide film and black-and-white print film. Every relief that remained in situ, as well as the fallen, broken pieces that were distributed in the rooms across the site were photographed. Meuszyński also arranged with the architect of his project, Richard P. Sobolewski, to survey the site and record it in plan and in elevation. As a result, the entire relief compositions were reconstructed, taking into account the presumed location of the fragments that were scattered around the world.
Excavations revealed remarkable bas-reliefs, ivories, and sculptures. A statue of Ashurnasirpal II was found in an excellent state of preservation, as were colossal winged man-headed lions weighing 10 short tons (9.1 t) to 30 short tons (27 t) each guarding the palace entrance. The large number of inscriptions dealing with king Ashurnasirpal II provide more details about him and his reign than are known for any other ruler of this epoch. The palaces of Ashurnasirpal II, Shalmaneser III, and Tiglath-Pileser III have been located. Portions of the site have been also been identified as temples to Ninurta and Enlil, a building assigned to Nabu, the god of writing and the arts, and as extensive fortifications.

In 1988, the Iraqi Department of Antiquities discovered four queens' tombs at the site.

Artworks
Nimrud has been one of the main sources of Assyrian sculpture, including the famous palace reliefs. Layard discovered more than half a dozen pairs of colossal guardian figures guarding palace entrances and doorways. These are lamassu, statues with a male human head, the body of a lion or bull, and wings. They have heads carved in the round, but the body at the side is in relief. They weigh up to 27 tonnes (30 short tons). In 1847 Layard brought two of the colossi weighing 9 tonnes (10 short tons) each including one lion and one bull to London. After 18 months and several near disasters he succeeded in bringing them to the British Museum. This involved loading them onto a wheeled cart. They were lowered with a complex system of pulleys and levers operated by dozens of men. The cart was towed by 300 men. He initially tried to hook up the cart to a team of buffalo and have them haul it. However the buffalo refused to move. Then they were loaded onto a barge which required 600 goatskins and sheepskins to keep it afloat. After arriving in London a ramp was built to haul them up the steps and into the museum on rollers.
Additional 27-tonne (30-short-ton) colossi were transported to Paris from Khorsabad by Paul Emile Botta in 1853. In 1928 Edward Chiera also transported a 36-tonne (40-short-ton) colossus from Khorsabad to Chicago. The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York has another pair.

The Statue of Ashurnasirpal II, Stela of Shamshi-Adad V and Stela of Ashurnasirpal II are large sculptures with portraits of these monarchs, all secured for the British Museum by Layard and the British archaeologist Hormuzd Rassam. Also in the British Museum is the famous Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III, discovered by Layard in 1846. This stands six-and-a-half-feet tall and commemorates with inscriptions and 24 relief panels the king's victorious campaigns of 859–824 BC. It is shaped like a temple tower at the top, ending in three steps.
Series of the distinctive Assyrian shallow reliefs were removed from the palaces and sections are now found in several museums (see gallery below), in particular the British Museum. These show scenes of hunting, warfare, ritual and processions. The Nimrud Ivories are a large group of ivory carvings, probably mostly originally decorating furniture and other objects, that had been brought to Nimrud from several parts of the ancient Near East, and were in a palace storeroom and other locations. These are mainly in the British Museum and the National Museum of Iraq, as well as other museums. Another storeroom held the Nimrud Bowls, about 120 large bronze bowls or plates, also imported.
The "Treasure of Nimrud" unearthed in these excavations is a collection of 613 pieces of gold jewelry and precious stones. It has survived the confusions and looting after the invasion of Iraq in 2003 in a bank vault, where it had been put away for 12 years and was "rediscovered" on June 5, 2003.

Significant inscriptions
One panel of the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III has an inscription which includes the name mIa-ú-a mar mHu-um-ri-i While Rawlinson originally translated this in 1850 as "Yahua, son of Hubiri", a year later Reverend Edward Hincks, suggested that it refers to King Jehu of Israel (2 Kings 9:2 ff. While other interpretations exist, the obelisk is widely viewed by biblical archaeologists as therefore including the earliest known dedication of an Israelite. Note: all the kings of Israel were called "sons of Omri" by the Assyrians ("mar" means "son").
A number of other artifacts considered important to Biblical history were excavated from the site, such as the Nimrud Tablet K.3751 and the Nimrud Slab. The bilingual Assyrian lion weights were important to scholarly deduction of the history of the alphabet.

Destruction
Nimrud's various monuments had faced threats from exposure to the harsh elements of the Iraqi climate. Lack of proper protective roofing meant that the ancient reliefs at the site were susceptible to erosion from wind-blown sand and strong seasonal rains.
In mid-2014, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) occupied the area surrounding Nimrud. ISIL destroyed other holy sites, including the Mosque of the Prophet Jonah in Mosul. In early 2015, they announced their intention to destroy many ancient artifacts, which they deemed idolatrous or otherwise un-Islamic; they subsequently destroyed thousands of books and manuscripts in Mosul's libraries. In February 2015, ISIL destroyed Akkadian monuments in the Mosul Museum, and on March 5, 2015, Iraq announced that ISIL militants had bulldozed Nimrud and its archaeological site on the basis that they were blasphemous.
A member of ISIL filmed the destruction, declaring, "These ruins that are behind me, they are idols and statues that people in the past used to worship instead of Allah. The Prophet Muhammad took down idols with his bare hands when he went into Mecca. We were ordered by our prophet to take down idols and destroy them, and the companions of the prophet did this after this time, when they conquered countries." ISIL declared an intention to destroy the restored city gates in Nineveh. ISIL went on to do demolition work at the later Parthian ruined city of Hatra. On April 12 2015, an online militant video purportedly showed ISIL militants hammering, bulldozing, and ultimately using explosives to blow up parts of Nimrud.
Irina Bokova, the director general of UNESCO, stated "deliberate destruction of cultural heritage constitutes a war crime". The president of the Syriac League in Lebanon compared the losses at the site to the destruction of culture by the Mongol Empire. In November 2016, aerial photographs showed the systematic leveling of the Ziggurat by heavy machines. On 13 November 2016, the Iraqi Army recaptured the city from ISIL. The Joint Operations Command stated that it had raised the Iraqi flag above its buildings and also captured the Assyrian village of Numaniya, on the edge of the town. By the time Nimrud was retaken, around 90% of the excavated part of the city had been destroyed entirely. Every major structure had been damaged, the Ziggurat of Nimrud had been flattened, only a few scattered broken walls remained of the palace of Ashurnasirpal II, the Lamassu that once guarded its gates had been smashed and scattered across the landscape.

Reconstruction of the site
A renovation program started in July 2017 with the support of UNESCO. The first phase included conducting studies of the damage caused to the site, assembling an Iraqi maintenance and rehabilitation team, preservation and archiving of the city's cultural heritage in co-operation with the American Smithsonian Institution. Phase 2 was launched in October 2019 with the goal to restore the northern palace.
As of 2020, archaeologists from the Nimrud Rescue Project have carried out two seasons of work at the site, training native Iraqi archaeologists on protecting heritage and helping preserve the remains. Plans for reconstruction and tourism are in the works but will likely not be implemented within the next decade. The first major excavation works, launched in mid-October 2022 by an excavation team from the University of Pennsylvania, reported the discovery of a door sill slab with inscriptions in December.

Security post Islamic State
Following the liberation from Islamic State, the security of the ancient city is run by the ethnic Assyrian security force Nineveh Plain Protection Units.

Gallery
See also
Cities of the ancient Near East
Hatra
Islamic Iconoclasm
Nimrud lens
Short chronology timeline

Notes
Citations
General references
Frankfort, Henri, The Art and Architecture of the Ancient Orient, Pelican History of Art, 4th ed 1970, Penguin (now Yale History of Art), ISBN 0140561072
A. H. Layard, Nineveh and Its Remains, John Murray, 1849 (Vol. 1 and Vol. 2)

Further reading
Crawford, Vaughn E.; et al. (1980). Assyrian reliefs and ivories in the Metropolitan Museum of Art: palace reliefs of Assurnasirpal II and ivory carvings from Nimrud. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 978-0870992605.
Russell, John Malcolm (1998). "The Program of the Palace of Assurnasirpal II at Nimrud: Issues in the Research and Presentation of Assyrian Art". American Journal of Archaeology. 102 (4): 655–715. doi:10.2307/506096. ISSN 0002-9114. JSTOR 506096. S2CID 191618390.
Barbara Parker, Seals and Seal Impressions from the Nimrud Excavations, Iraq, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 26–40 1962
Barbara Parker, "Nimrud Tablets, 1956: Economic and Legal Texts from the Nabu Temple", Iraq, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 125–138, 1957
D. J. Wiseman, "The Nabu Temple Texts from Nimrud", Journal of Near Eastern Studies, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 248–250, 1968
D. J. Wiseman, Fragments of Historical Texts from Nimrud, Iraq, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 118–124, 1964
A. H. Layard, Discoveries in the Ruins of Nineveh and Babylon, John Murray, 1853
A. H. Layard, The monuments of Nineveh; from drawings made on the spot, John Murray, 1849
Claudius James Rich, Narrative of a residence in Koordistan, and on the site of ancient Nineveh. Ed. by his widow, 1836
James Phillips Fletcher, Narrative of a Two Years' Residence at Nineveh, Volume 2, 1850
Muzahim Mahmoud Hussein, Nimrud: The Queens' Tombs. 2016

External links

Metropolitan Museum: Digital Reconstruction of the Northwest Palace, Nimrud, Assyria
Nimrud/Calah
Kalhu / Nimrud
Centro Ricerche Archeologiche e Scavi di Torino excavation site
Archaeological site photographs at Oriental Institute
More images from National Geographic
"Treasure of Nimrud rediscovered", article from The Wall Street Journal posted to a message board
The Secret of Nimrud - Photographs by Noreen Feeney


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 724
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%83%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%AD
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

كالح وتعرف كذلك بأسماء أخرى ككالخو وكالخو والنمرود، كانت مدينة آشورية، آثارها باقية، موقعها في ناحية النمرود والمسافة 30 كيلومتراً بينها وبين مدينة الموصل شمالاً، في جمهورية العراق اليوم، أسست كالخو في القرن الثالث عشر قبل الميلاد. وأصبحت في القرن التاسع قبل الميلاد عاصمة الإمبراطورية الآشورية الحديثة زمن الملك آشور ناصربال الثاني، ودمرت في العام 612 ق.م على يد البابيلين والميديين. وتم في ما بعد تخريب ما تبقى من الاثار على يد تنظيم الدولة الاسلامية في الموصل سنة 2015 ، وتمت إعادة اعمار وترميم المدينة الأثرية بالتعاون مع اليونسكو 2017 .

الاسم
يرد اسم المدينة في النصوص الآشورية على شكل كالخو، وفي التناخ يرد الاسم بشكل كالخ/ كالح، أما الاسم نمرود فهو على الأرجح تسمية حديثة مستمدة من الشخصية التناخية «نمرود»، فأقدم ذكر لهذه التسمية يعود للرحالة الألماني «كارستن نيبور» والذي زار موقع المدينة في العام 1766 م.

آثار
تمت أولى عمليات التنقيب في الموقع في العام 1846 م بإدارة الدبلوماسي والآثاري البريطاني «(السير أوستن هنري لايارد Sir Austen Henry Layard)»، وقد كشفت عن بقايا قصر كبير، وتحصينات. كما عثر كذلك مجموعة كبيرة من المنحوتات من حجر الألبستر، ومشغولات عاجية ومسلات وتماثيل ضخمة.
في عام 1955 م كشفت الحفريات في معبد نبو والتي ادارها الآثاري البريطاني "Sir Max Edgar Lucien Mallowan" عن رقم مسمارية عليها نصوص تحوي عهود الولاء التي قدمها الحكام التابعين في الدولة الآشورية للملوك الآشوريين.

كالح الآن
تعاني كالح في السنوات الماضية من الإهمال، حيث تتعرض الآثار المكشوفة للتعرية بسبب التصحر في المنطقة.

التدمير
واجهت معالم كالح المتنوعة تهديدات نتيجة تعرضها لعوامل الطقس القاسية في المناخ العراقي. فقد أدى عدم توفر أسقف واقية مناسبة إلى جعل النقوش البارزة القديمة في الموقع عرضة للتآكل بفعل الرمال المحملة بالرياح والأمطار الموسمية الغزيرة.
في منتصف عام 2014، احتلت الدولة الإسلامية في العراق والشام (داعش) المنطقة المحيطة بكالح. وقام داعش بتدمير مواقع دينية أخرى، بما في ذلك مسجد النبي يونس (يونان) في الموصل. وفي أوائل عام 2015، أعلنوا نيتهم تدمير العديد من القطع الأثرية القديمة التي اعتبروها شركية أو غير إسلامية؛ وبعد ذلك، دمروا آلاف الكتب والمخطوطات في مكتبات الموصل. وفي فبراير 2015، دمر داعش النصب الأكدية في متحف الموصل، وفي 5 مارس 2015، أعلنت العراق أن مسلحي داعش قاموا بهدم كالح وموقعها الأثري بحجة أنها تجديف.
قام أحد أعضاء داعش بتصوير عملية التدمير، معلنًا: "هذه الأطلال خلفي، إنها أصنام وتماثيل كان الناس يعبدونها في الماضي بدلاً من الله. لقد أزال النبي محمد الأصنام بيديه العاريتين عندما دخل مكة. وقد أُمرنا من قبل نبيّنا بأن نزيل الأصنام وندمرها، وقد فعل بذلك أصحاب النبي فيما بعد، عندما فتحوا البلدان."
أعلن داعش عن نيته تدمير أبواب المدينة المُرممة في نينوى.
واصل داعش القيام بأعمال هدم في المدينة البرثية المهجورة لحطرا.
في 12 أبريل 2015، ظهر في فيديو على الإنترنت لمقاتلين، يُزعم أنهم يقومون بالطرق، والهرم، واستخدام المتفجرات لتفجير أجزاء من كالح.
صرحت إيرينا بوكوفا، المديرة العامة لليونسكو، بأن "التدمير المتعمد للتراث الثقافي يشكل جريمة حرب".
قارن رئيس الرابطة السريانية في لبنان الخسائر في الموقع بتدمير الثقافة على يد الإمبراطورية المغولية.
في نوفمبر 2016، أظهرت الصور الجوية عملية تسوية منهجية للزقورة بواسطة الآلات الثقيلة.
في 13 نوفمبر 2016، استعاد الجيش العراقي المدينة من داعش. وذكر قيادة العمليات المشتركة أنه قام برفع العلم العراقي فوق مبانيها واستولى كذلك على القرية الآشورية نُومانية، على هامش المدينة.
وبحلول استعادة كالح، تم تدمير حوالي 90% من الجزء المستخرج من المدينة بالكامل. فقد تضررت كل الهياكل الرئيسية، وسُويت زقورة نمرود، ولم يتبق سوى عدد قليل من الجدران المكسورة المتناثرة من قصر آشور نصرب الثاني، فيما تم تحطيم اللاماسو التي كانت تحرس أبوابها وتفريقها عبر المشهد.

إعادة ترميم الموقع
بدأ برنامج تجديد في يوليو 2017 بدعم من اليونسكو. شملت المرحلة الأولى إجراء دراسات للأضرار التي لحقت بالموقع، وتشكيل فريق عراقي للصيانة والتأهيل، والحفاظ على التراث الثقافي للمدينة وأرشفةه بالتعاون مع مؤسسة سميثسونيان الأمريكية. وتم إطلاق المرحلة الثانية في أكتوبر 2019 بهدف ترميم القصر الشمالي.
اعتباراً من عام 2020، قام علماء الآثار من مشروع إنقاذ نمرود بتنفيذ موسمين من العمل في الموقع، حيث قاموا بتدريب علماء الآثار العراقيين المحليين على حماية التراث والمساعدة في الحفاظ على البقايا. وهناك خطط لإعادة الإعمار وتطوير السياحة جارٍ إعدادها، ولكن من المحتمل ألا تُنفذ خلال العقد القادم.
أبلغت أولى أعمال التنقيب الرئيسية، التي انطلقت في منتصف أكتوبر 2022 بواسطة فريق من جامعة بنسلفانيا، عن اكتشاف لوح عتبة باب يحمل نقوشاً في ديسمبر.

الأمن بعد الدولة الإسلامية
بعد تحرير المدينة من الدولة الإسلامية، يتم إدارة أمن المدينة القديمة بواسطة القوة الأمنية العرقية الآشوريين من خلال وحدات حماية سهل نينوى.

أعلام
سنحاريب
سرجون الثاني

انظر أيضاً
عاجيات نمرود


== المصادر ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 11,112
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nimroud
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nimroud (en arabe : النمرود, Nimrūd) est un site archéologique qui tire son nom du personnage biblique de Nimrod, sur lequel se trouvent les ruines de la cité assyrienne appelée Kalkhu (Kalḫu, Calah dans la Bible). Ce tell est situé à l'est du Tigre, à quelques kilomètres au nord de son confluent avec le Zab supérieur. Kalkhu était située à 35 km de Ninive (un faubourg de l'actuelle ville irakienne de Mossoul).
Kalkhu fut l'une des plus grandes métropoles de la Mésopotamie antique. Elle s'étendit sur environ 360 hectares à son apogée, lorsqu'elle fut la capitale de l'Assyrie, à partir du règne d'Assurnasirpal II (883-859 av. J.-C.). Ce dernier a en effet entrepris de la reconstruire complètement et de l'étendre pour qu'elle reflète la puissance de son royaume. Elle eut le rang de capitale jusqu'à la fin du VIIIe siècle av. J.-C., où elle fut supplantée par Dur-Sharrukin (Khorsabad), puis par Ninive. Elle fut détruite dans les années 614-612 av. J.-C., lors de la chute de l'empire assyrien sous les coups des attaques conjuguées des Babyloniens et des Mèdes.
Les fouilles de l'ancienne Kalkhu se sont concentrées essentiellement sur le tell de Nimroud mais également sur le tell Azar voisin, correspondant à un ancien arsenal (« Fort Salmanazar »). Elles débutèrent dès les années 1840, en même temps qu'étaient découvertes plusieurs autres capitales de l'ancienne Assyrie (Ninive, Dur-Sharrukin). Ces fouilles furent poursuivies à plusieurs reprises depuis, sous la direction de plusieurs équipes d'archéologues, principalement britanniques et irakiennes. Elles permirent la mise au jour de plusieurs bâtiments remarquables, dont en premier lieu le palais sud-ouest d'Assurnasirpal II et plusieurs temples, ainsi que d'autres palais sur le tell de Nimroud, et un autre édifice servant d'arsenal aux armées assyriennes de Fort Salmanazar.
Les archéologues y ont exhumé de nombreuses sculptures sur pierre, notamment des statues colossales de génies gardant les portes de ses édifices (taureaux et lions androcéphales ailés) et des bas-reliefs représentant des génies protecteurs, ainsi que des scènes de victoire des troupes assyriennes. Parmi les autres découvertes notables, on compte des milliers d'objets en ivoire sculpté, provenant pour la plupart de Syrie et de Phénicie. On a également retrouvé des bijoux finement ouvragés en or et en pierres précieuses, dans des tombes de reines assyriennes qui furent mises au jour dans le palais sud-ouest. De nombreuses tablettes cunéiformes ont également été exhumées.
Après avoir été reconstruit par les autorités irakiennes à partir des années 1950, le site a subi de nombreuses dégradations, à la suite de la déstabilisation de la situation politique du Nord de l'Irak dans les années 1990 et 2000. Il a ensuite été l'une des cibles de la campagne de destruction du patrimoine culturel par l’État islamique en mars 2015. Les principaux monuments et œuvres d'art qui étaient demeurés sur le site de Nimroud ont été détruits au bulldozer et à l'explosif à cette occasion.

Le site de Nimroud à l'époque contemporaine : redécouverte, restaurations et destructions
Le site de Nimroud fut mentionné pour la première fois sous ce nom dans les sources modernes par le Danois Carsten Niebuhr, alors qu'il séjournait à Mossoul en 1776. Il avait alors reçu le nom du chasseur et fondateur de cités Nimrod, un personnage légendaire mentionné dans la Genèse (X, 11-12) et repris dans les traditions juive et islamique en relation avec le patriarche Abraham. Du fait de son caractère de fondateur de cités, les habitants de l'Irak avaient nommé plusieurs sites de ruines antiques d'après son nom car ils lui en attribuaient la fondation (c'est également le cas de Birs Nimroud dans le Sud où se trouvent les ruines de l'antique Borsippa). Le site fut exploré à partir des années 1840, période de la redécouverte des capitales assyriennes par des diplomates anglais et français, qui s'improvisaient archéologues avec des méthodes encore peu abouties, plus orientées vers la recherche d’œuvres d'art à rapporter dans leur pays.

Les fouilles britanniques du XIXe siècle
Le site de Nimroud attira d'abord l'attention de l'Anglais G. P. Badger en 1844. L'année suivante, son compatriote Austen Henry Layard entama les premières fouilles, croyant alors avoir trouvé Ninive. Seulement aidé dans la direction des fouilles par le chrétien irakien Hormuzd Rassam, et financé d'abord par l'ambassadeur britannique dans l'empire ottoman, Stratford Canning, puis par les Trustees du British Museum, il conduisit ses travaux de 1845 à 1847 puis de 1849 à 1851. Ses campagnes marquèrent un tournant dans l'essor de l'archéologie mésopotamienne, en raison de l'ampleur des découvertes, contemporaines de celles des consuls français à Khorsabad. Layard put dégager une partie du Palais nord-ouest, ainsi que les temples de Ninurta et d'Ishtar, la ziggurat, les palais central, sud-est et sud-ouest, et aussi le Fort Salmanazar. Il exhuma surtout les bas-reliefs du palais principal et les statues colossales gardant les portes des édifices, ainsi que d'autres œuvres remarquables comme l'obélisque noir de Salmanazar III.
Le British Museum, qui récupéra les sculptures et autres œuvres remarquables trouvées sur le site pour les exposer dans ses collections (mais un certain nombre fut vendu à diverses institutions et personnes privées, ce qui explique leur éparpillement actuel), poursuivit le financement de fouilles après le départ de Layard : Henry Rawlinson en 1852 avec l'aide de Felix Jones, capitaine de l'Indian Navy qui dressa un plan du site, puis Rassam en 1852–54, et William K. Loftus et William Boutcher en 1854–55, qui dégagèrent les palais central, sud-est et nord ouest ainsi que le temple de Nabû. À la lecture des inscriptions du site, Rawlinson avait alors compris qu'il ne s'agissait pas de Ninive comme le pensait Layard, mais d'une autre capitale assyrienne, Kalkhu (Calah dans la Bible).
Le site fut ensuite visité par des représentants d'autres pays, à la recherche de bas-reliefs à acquérir : le Français Pacifique-Henri Delaporte en 1862, et le Suisse Julius Weber en 1864. Les fouilles reprirent brièvement sous la direction du britannique George Smith en 1873, puis à nouveau de Hormuzd Rassam en 1878-1879, qui explora à son tour les palais sud-est et central, le temple de Nabû, et découvrit le temple de Kidmuru.

Les fouilles de l'après-guerre et les restaurations
Les campagnes de fouilles reprirent à Nimroud en 1949, à l'initiative de l’École britannique d'archéologie en Irak (British School of Archaeology in Iraq, BSAI, aujourd'hui British Institute for the Study of Iraq, BISI). Treize campagnes furent conduites, sous la direction de Max Mallowan jusqu'en 1957 (accompagné de son épouse Agatha Christie, qui a laissé des témoignages de ces fouilles dans son Autobiographie). Elles se poursuivirent sous la conduite de David Oates qui avait accompagné Mallowan depuis ses débuts, et enfin en 1963 sous celle de Jeffrey Orchard. Ces campagnes furent en particulier l'occasion de dégager la partie privée du Palais nord-ouest, où furent mis au jour de nombreux objets en ivoire, et de poursuivre l'exploration des autres monuments de l'acropole (les temples de Ninurta et de Nabû, le Palais brûlé, le Palais du Gouverneur, le Palais sud-est, le Bâtiment de 1950, les résidences situées contre l'enceinte) et de Fort Salmanazar. La BSAI/BISI entreprit également la publication des tablettes cunéiformes retrouvées à Nimroud dans la série d'ouvrages Cuneiform Texts from Nimrud (CTN).
Parallèlement, le Département des Antiquités irakien conduisit des fouilles dans le Palais nord-ouest sous la direction de Behnam Abu es-Soof, entre 1956 et 1959, avec le projet de restaurer les salles de l'édifice pour le préserver et l'ouvrir au tourisme, en commençant par la salle du trône. À partir de 1969, les équipes irakiennes reprirent leurs campagnes de fouilles et de restaurations des édifices de Nimroud essentiellement dans le Palais nord-ouest. Une partie des œuvres dégagées fut transférée au Musée de Mossoul, qui ouvrit ses portes en 1974. Parmi les découvertes marquantes, de nouveaux ivoires furent découverts en 1975 dans une pièce du sud du Palais nord-ouest. Parallèlement, de 1974 à 1976, une équipe d'archéologues polonais dirigée par Janusz Meuszynski fouilla les bâtiments du centre du tell (Bâtiment central, Palais central). Entre 1987 et 1989, ce furent des équipes italiennes qui rejoignent le site, effectuant une prospection de surface et poursuivant les fouilles du Fort Salmanazar. En 1989, une équipe du British Museum revint pour fouiller le même édifice.
La trouvaille la plus spectaculaire des dernières campagnes de fouilles de Nimroud fut celle, entre 1988 et 1991, des tombes souterraines de plusieurs reines assyriennes, situées dans la partie sud du Palais nord-ouest, qui livrèrent une impressionnante quantité d'objets de luxe. Les travaux de fouilles et de restauration, interrompus par la Première guerre du Golfe, reprirent brièvement à partir de 2001, en particulier dans le secteur du temple d'Ishtar.

Les destructions
Dans les semaines qui suivirent la chute du régime de Saddam Hussein, dès 2003, le site de Nimroud fit l'objet des premières dégradations. Les pilleurs tentèrent d'enlever des bas-reliefs et d'en fracturer plusieurs, et se livrèrent également au pillage du musée national d'Irak et du musée de Mossoul qui contenaient une partie des œuvres provenant de Nimroud. Le trésor des tombes des reines fut épargné, mis à l'abri dans la Banque centrale irakienne. Le site fut ensuite placé sous la protection de l'armée américaine, jusqu'au retrait de celle-ci du pays.
Lorsque l'État islamique s'empara de la région en 2014, les sites archéologiques antiques devinrent leur cible préférentielle. En raison de leur caractère non islamique et de la présence de représentations relevant de religions antiques polythéistes, ils furent considérés comme « idolâtres » et voués à la destruction. Le 5 mars 2015, l'État Islamique annonça avoir entrepris la destruction du site de Nimroud. Mais cette entreprise d'anéantissement toucha également d'autres sites antiques renommés tels que Ninive, Hatra et Khorsabad, ainsi que le musée de Mossoul. Des vidéos de propagande montrent la destruction de plusieurs bas-reliefs et statues du Palais nord-ouest de Nimroud par des djihadistes, ainsi que des remparts de la cité. La destruction se poursuivit au bulldozer, puis à la dynamite. La salle du trône fut endommagée à l'explosif le 7 avril 2015, la ziggourat fut rasée entre le 31 août et le 2 octobre 2016. L'ampleur des dégâts matériels, encore difficilement estimable faute de témoignages, est de toute évidence considérable et irréparable. Cette destruction des lieux prestigieux, qui s'accompagne d'un commerce illicite des œuvres d'art provenant des sites détruits, a été dénoncée par l'UNESCO comme étant un « crime de guerre ». Quelque 500 bas-reliefs et dalles de toutes tailles ont été détruits par l'État islamique, ainsi que plusieurs lamassu, qui ornaient le palais du roi assyrien Assurnasirpal II.
Le site de Nimroud a été repris par l'armée irakienne le 13 novembre 2016, lors de la bataille de Mossoul. 
Les travaux de réhabilitation du site débutent en 2018, mais sont interrompus par la pandémie de coronavirus, avant de reprendre en 2023. Les archéologues procèdent à un processus de collecte, de classification et d'identification des morceaux retrouvés. En janvier 2025, plus de 35 000 fragments ont déjà été collectés.

Historique
Origines
Le tell de Nimroud a été occupé depuis au moins la fin de l'époque protohistorique : les plus vieux objets retrouvés sur le site, lors d'un sondage effectué par Max Mallowan, datent de la période de Ninive V (v. 3000 av. J.-C.). Mais le site a fourni peu de documentation pour ses périodes anciennes, puisque seule une tombe datée du milieu du XVIIIe siècle av. J.-C. retrouvée sous le temple de Nabû indique une occupation avant l'époque assyrienne. Autre indice d'un peuplement notable du site à cette période, la ville apparaît dans la documentation écrite contemporaine exhumée à Mari en Syrie (années 1810-1760 av. J.-C.), sous le nom de Kawalkhum. Elle y apparaît notamment comme le principal port marchand pour le trafic fluvial sur le cours supérieur du Tigre. Par la suite, la ville intégra le royaume assyrien, sans doute au moment des conquêtes effectuées dans sa région à partir du règne d'Assur-uballit Ier (1366-1330 av. J.-C.), qui marquent l'essor du royaume « médio-assyrien » (v. 1400-1000 av. J.-C.). Kalkhu est mentionnée dans quelques textes de cette période, mais celle-ci est pauvrement documentée par l'archéologie (des traces éparses de décoration dans un temple), ce qui ne permet pas d'en savoir plus sur son développement à cette époque.

La construction d'une nouvelle capitale
Au milieu du IXe siècle av. J.-C., Kalkhu était donc un centre provincial du puissant royaume assyrien, proche de la capitale politique et religieuse traditionnelle de celui-ci, Assur, et sur l'axe entre celle-ci et Ninive, autre métropole assyrienne. Assurnasirpal II (883-859 av. J.-C.), après avoir conduit de nombreuses campagnes consolidant son royaume en Syrie et été le premier souverain assyrien à parvenir au rivage de la Méditerranée depuis le temps du glorieux Teglath-Phalasar Ier (1114-1076 av. J.-C.), prit la décision de construire une nouvelle capitale à Kalkhu. Ses motivations, jamais explicités dans ses inscriptions commémoratives, sont obscures. Le fait qu'Assur soit à la merci d'une attaque venant de l'ouest (elle était située sur la rive ouest du Tigre), où résidaient les dangereux Araméens, alors que Kalkhu était mieux protégée (sur la rive est, avec le Grand Zab à proximité), a pu peser dans cette décision. Un autre élément qui a pu jouer dans le choix de l'emplacement est le fait que la nouvelle capitale était située à des distances raisonnables des grandes villes historiques et sacrées d'Assyrie que sont Assur, Ninive et Arbèles, amorçant un déplacement du centre de gravité du royaume vers le Nord, tout en le tenant à l'écart des élites de ces anciennes métropoles potentiellement turbulentes. Assurnasirpal II crée ainsi un nouveau centre politique dont il sélectionne les résidents, où il peut renforcer sa prééminence et celle de l'administration impériale. Il confie la supervision de la construction de la ville à un de ses plus proches serviteurs, l'eunuque Nergal-apil-kumu'a.

Le chantier de construction de Kalkhu, qui fut une véritable refondation de la ville, est célébré dans plusieurs inscriptions royales d'Assurnasirpal II retrouvées dans les édifices principaux de la ville. C'est en particulier le cas de l'« Inscription standard », un texte court (une vingtaine de lignes) commémorant les conquêtes du souverain et la construction de la nouvelle capitale. Elle doit son nom au fait qu'elle fut reproduite sans grande variation des dizaines de fois sur les bas-reliefs du Palais nord-ouest d'Assurnasirpal II, en position centrale. D'autres inscriptions du souverain reprennent par ailleurs en partie ce texte. Un autre texte primordial pour connaître la construction de Kalkhu est la « Stèle du banquet », texte nettement plus long débutant par une version abrégée du précédent puis développant la description de la construction des palais et temples de la ville, les différentes essences d'arbres implantées dans les jardins de la ville, et enfin le formidable banquet que le monarque donna pour célébrer la fin de la construction, passage final auquel le texte doit son nom moderne. Ces textes présentent une vision idéalisée de la construction de la ville, mettant en valeur la personne du roi, sa puissance et sa capacité à maîtriser les ressources de son royaume et à y assurer l'ordre du monde suivant les volontés des grands dieux qui lui ont confié ses destinées en assurant ses triomphes militaires, afin de réaliser une ville grandiose et des monuments sans égal. Cette entreprise créatrice fait écho à celle des divinités dans les mythes de création. Ces récits servirent de modèle aux récits de construction des rois assyriens suivants, en particulier ceux relatant la construction des capitales suivantes (Dur-Sharrukin par Sargon II et surtout Ninive par Sennacherib).
La reconstruction de Kalkhu mobilisa les ressources de l'empire, accumulées au cours des différentes campagnes militaires, qui se soldaient par des pillages, la perception de tributs, et des déportations de populations vaincues, souvent établies en Assyrie depuis le Moyen-Euphrate et la Syrie intérieure :

« La vieille cité de Kalkhu que Salmanazar, roi d'Assyrie, un prince qui me précéda, avait construite - cette cité était en ruines, restait en sommeil. Je reconstruisis cette ville. Je pris les peuples que j'avais conquis, depuis les pays que j'avais dominés, du pays de Suhu, du pays de Laqe dans sa totalité, de la ville de Sirqu qui est sur le gué de l'Euphrate, du pays de Zamua, du Bit-Adini et du pays du Hatti, et de Lubarna et du Patinu. Je les installai au cœur (de la ville). »

— Inscription Standard, l. 14b)-17b).
Ces populations furent manifestement mobilisées pour le chantier de la ville (artisans, ouvriers sur les chantiers) puis pour la peupler. Les récits officiels d'Assurnasipal, qui ne sont pas complétés par des lettres permettant de suivre le déroulement du chantier (comme c'est le cas pour Dur-Sharrukin), s'attardent surtout sur les formidables réalisations du chantier, en premier lieu le palais royal (le « Palais nord-ouest ») :

« Je dégageai les ruines anciennes et je creusai jusqu'au niveau de la nappe d'eau, atteignant une profondeur de 120 niveaux de briques. À l'intérieur (de la ville) je fondai pour toute éternité, en guise de résidence royale et pour mon plaisir souverain, un palais de cèdre, un palais de cyprès, un palais de genévrier, un palais de buis, un palais de meskannu (essence inconnue), un palais de térébinthe et de tamaris. Je fis (des répliques) en calcaire blanc et en albâtre des créatures des montagnes et de la mer parûtu et je les postai à ses portes. Je le décorai somptueusement. Je l'entourai de clous de bronze à large tête. Je fixai à ses portes des vantaux en bois de cèdre, de cyprès, de genévrier et de meskannu. Je réunis et déposai à l'intérieur de grandes quantités d'argent, d'or, d'étain, de bronze et de fer, butin provenant des pays sur lesquels j'avais étendu ma domination. »

— Inscription Standard, l. 17b)-22.
La Stèle du banquet évoque également la construction de temples pour les grands dieux du royaume, aussi somptueusement décorés que le palais : en tout neuf temples dédiés à Enlil et Ninurta, Ea-le-roi et sa parèdre Damkina, Adad et sa parèdre Shala, Gula, Sîn, Nabû, Ishtar sous son aspect šarrat nipḫi, les Sibitti et Kidmuru (apparemment un autre aspect d'Ishtar, inconnu par ailleurs). La même inscription s'attarde longuement la réalisation des jardins situés aux alentours de Kalkhu. On creusa d'abord un canal dérivé du Zab supérieur, appelé Patti-ḫegalli (« Canal qui apporte l'abondance »), qui servit à l'irrigation de la plaine, où furent plantés des jardins comprenant une grande variété d'arbres, issus des pays qu'avait soumis le roi, tout comme les populations déportées venues construire et habiter Kalkhu, symbolisant à une échelle réduite la domination du roi sur son empire. Ces jardins furent également érigés pour le plus grand plaisir de ses sens :

« Depuis les hauteurs, le canal coule avec vigueur en direction des vergers. Les allées sont embaumées de parfums. Les ruisseaux, aussi nombreux que les étoiles du ciel (?), coulent dans ce jardin d'agrément. »

— Stèle du banquet, l. 49-50.
Le chantier de construction s'acheva par une fête au cours de laquelle les dieux de l'Assyrie, le grand dieu national Assur en tête, furent conviés à venir admirer et bénir la réalisation d'Assurnasirpal II. La Stèle du banquet comprend une longue liste de tous les animaux, céréales, fruits, légumes et boissons qui furent servis aux convives : ainsi 100 bœufs gras, 500 oies, 10 000 pigeons, 10 000 œufs, autant de galettes de pain, 100 jarres de bière de qualité, autant de miel, de lait, de moutarde et de fromage, des dattes, des pistaches, des épices et divers condiments, etc.. Le texte conclut en énumérant les sujets du souverain qui furent « invités » à admirer sa nouvelle capitale et au banquet en son honneur :

« Quand je consacrai le palais de Kalkhu, 47 074 hommes et femmes invités de toutes les parties de mon royaume, 5 000 dignitaires et envoyés des peuples des pays de Suhu, Hindanu, Patinu, Hatti, Tyr, Sidon, Gurgum, Melid, Hubusku, Gilzanu, Kummuhu (et) Musasir, 16 000 gens de Kalkhu et 1 500 zariqu de mon palais (fonctionnaires assyriens), tous, en tout 69 574 personnes de tous les pays ainsi que les gens de Kalkhu, je les ai nourris pendant dix jours, je les ai abreuvés de vin, je les ai fait baigner, oindre. Ainsi je les honorai puis les renvoyai dans leurs contrées dans la paix et dans la joie. »

— Stèle du banquet, l. 141-154.
Ce récit met ainsi en exergue la puissance du royaume et les territoires qu'il domine, l'abondance qui y règne, la générosité du roi.

Les inscriptions ne parlent pas d'une autre importante réalisation architecturale, la muraille qui protégeait la ville, ni l'urbanisme de celle-ci. Finalement, Assurnasirpal II mena un chantier d'une ampleur sans précédent dans l'histoire mésopotamienne, porteur de diverses innovations architecturales, en premier lieu son palais royal et ses statues et bas-reliefs qui devinrent alors caractéristiques de l'art assyrien. Ces innovations devaient manifestement beaucoup aux traditions syriennes (araméenne, néo-hittite), ce qui est logique vu que les artisans du chantier et les ressources de celui-ci venaient pour une bonne part de la moitié occidentale du royaume nouvellement soumise. Assurnasirpal II fut ainsi l'un des plus grands bâtisseurs de l'histoire mésopotamienne, et servit de modèle à ses successeurs qui furent nombreux à chercher à égaler ou même surpasser ses réalisations.
Le règne de ce souverain ne suffit cependant pas à mener son œuvre jusqu'à son terme. Il revint en effet à son fils et successeur Salmanazar III (858-824 av. J.-C.) de conduire la finalisation de plusieurs chantiers, dont la ziggurat, et d'ériger sur le second tell de la cité un autre palais qui servirait de quartier général aux armées assyriennes, dénommé « Fort Salmanazar » par les archéologues qui l'ont exhumé.

Kalkhu aux VIIIe et VIIe siècles : capitale puis métropole provinciale
Shamshi-Adad V (823-811 av. J.-C.) a laissé peu de traces de son activité à Nimroud, où seule une stèle le représentant fut mise au jour. Son successeur Adad-nerari III (810-783 av. J.-C.) entreprit la construction d'un nouveau palais sur ce site, dans la continuité méridionale de celui d'Assurnasirpal II, et fut peut-être à l'origine de la construction du « Palais brûlé » ainsi que de la reconstruction du temple de Nabû, et même de l'érection d'un nouveau palais dans la ville basse. Cette période vit un affaiblissement du pouvoir royal assyrien. La puissance du royaume ne fut rétablie que dans la seconde moitié du VIIIe siècle av. J.-C. par Teglath-Phalasar III (745-727 av. J.-C.). Ce souverain monta sur le trône à la suite d'une révolte initiée depuis Kalkhu, signe de la prise d'importance de cette ville, dont le gouverneur Bel-dan joua sans doute un rôle décisif dans les événements. Considéré comme le fondateur de l'« empire » assyrien, par ses conquêtes et son œuvre de réorganisation de l’État assyrien, Teglath-Phalasar III fit construire à Kalkhu un nouveau palais, le « Palais central », et une de ses inscriptions indique qu'il fit ériger un édifice de type bit-hilani. Plusieurs de ses lettres ont été retrouvées dans le Palais nord-ouest.
Le règne de Sargon II (722-705 av. J.-C.) marqua un tournant dans l'histoire de Kalkhu. S'il résida au début de son règne dans le Palais nord-ouest, où une partie de sa correspondance a été exhumée, et peut-être dans le Palais brûlé, il projeta à partir de 717 la construction d'une nouvelle capitale à son nom, Dur-Sharrukin, la « Forteresse de Sargon » (l'actuel site de Khorsabad). Construite ex nihilo, cette ville s'inspirait grandement du modèle fourni par Kalkhu (terrasse principale comprenant un palais royal décoré de bas-reliefs et de statues monumentales et des temples, un arsenal sur une terrasse séparée). La raison de ce changement de capitale est tout aussi énigmatique que la précédente.

La mort brutale de Sargon en 705 fut suivie par l'abandon de sa nouvelle capitale par son fils et successeur Sennacherib (705-681 av. J.-C.), qui déplaça sa capitale à Ninive, cité au passé prestigieux qu'il reconstruisit de fond en comble, entreprenant un chantier qui dépassa par son ampleur ceux de ses prédécesseurs. Cela confirma la relégation de Kalkhu au rang de capitale secondaire de l'empire assyrien, même si elle gardait un prestige important, notamment dans le domaine intellectuel et religieux si on en juge par les tablettes retrouvées dans le temple de Nabû (dont certaines écrites par le grand scribe de Sargon II et Sennacherib, Nabû-zuqub-kena). Assarhaddon (680-669 av. J.-C.), s'il résida principalement dans la nouvelle capitale, ne délaissa pas Kalkhu pour autant, puisqu'il y restaura l'arsenal, y conclut peut-être des traités dont les versions écrites ont été mises au jour dans le temple de Nabû, et initia la construction d'un nouveau palais, le « Palais sud-ouest », qui ne fut jamais achevé. Cela fit penser qu'il avait envisagé de rétablir Kalkhu comme capitale, même si ce n'est pas assuré car il maintint une activité importante à Ninive. Son successeur Assurbanipal (669-626 av. J.-C.) n'a pas laissé de trace de son activité dans cette ville.
L'empire assyrien s'effondra entre 626 et 609 av. J.-C. à la suite d'une guerre civile liée à la succession d'Assurbanipal, dont profitèrent les Babyloniens puis leurs alliés de circonstance Mèdes pour abattre la puissance moribonde. Les principales villes assyriennes furent prises entre 616 et 612 av. J.-C. Kalkhu semble avoir été attaquée en 614 par les Mèdes (quand ils détruisirent Assur), mais avoir résisté au siège. Elle tomba finalement lors de la campagne conjointe des Babyloniens et des Mèdes de 612, qui emporta également Ninive. C'est de ce moment que doit dater une brèche repérée dans la muraille au niveau du Fort Salmanazar, creusée au moment de l'assaut final. Les édifices de la ville présentent des traces de destruction. Un des puits du Palais nord-ouest contenait de nombreux squelettes humains (peut-être jusqu'à 400), un certain nombre menottés aux bras et aux jambes. Il est tentant d'identifier ces derniers comme des prisonniers exécutés après la prise de la ville ; les autres corps pourraient être des restes humains dégagés des tombes voûtées voisines qui furent pillées au même moment.

L'époque post-assyrienne
Après leur destruction en 612 av. J.-C., les monuments de la citadelle principale et de Fort Salmanazar furent réoccupés par ceux que les fouilleurs du site ont désigné comme des « squatters », vraisemblablement des habitants de la ville et de ses alentours ayant survécu aux attaques et ayant cherché refuge dans les bâtiments les plus solides. Ces occupations furent manifestement brèves, et terminèrent dans la violence.
Le tell principal fut réoccupé partiellement par la suite, apparemment à la période achéménide (539-330 av. J.-C.), au cours de laquelle le site est mentionné (sous le nom de Larissa) par l'historien grec Xénophon qui y passa lors de la retraite des Dix Mille en 401 av. J.-C., et que ses ruines servent de refuge à la population des alentours (il évoque un site inhabité). Le tell de Nimroud est habité plus durablement au cours de la période hellénistique, entre 250 et 150 av. J.-C. environ. Des petites habitations de cette époque, organisées autour d'une cour, ainsi que des sépultures ont été identifiées sur les niveaux situés au-dessus de ceux de l'époque néo-assyrienne. De nombreux objets de cette période ont été exhumés (bijoux, céramique, pièces de monnaie, statuettes en terre cuite). Le village, après une période relativement prospère, semble être abandonné après une destruction dans les années 140 av. J.-C., qui correspondent à la prise de contrôle de la région par les Parthes.

Les monuments de Nimroud
Après les chantiers d'Assurnasirpal II et de Salmanazar III, Kalkhu était une imposante cité d'environ 360 hectares, protégée par une enceinte d'approximativement 7,5 kilomètres de long. Au sud-ouest, la citadelle comprenant les édifices officiels principaux est un tell de 400 × 600 mètres, le tell de Nimroud à proprement parler. C'est du reste la zone la plus anciennement occupée du site, autour de laquelle s'est développée la ville avant son élévation au statut de capitale de l'Assyrie. Il s'agit d'une véritable citadelle, isolée du reste de la ville par sa muraille, et comprenant des édifices associés au pouvoir royal (palais, temples, résidences des élites), suivant un modèle qui semble inspiré par l'urbanisme syro-anatolien (Karkemish, Tell Halaf). Au sud-est, le tell de Tulul al-Azar comprend les ruines de l'arsenal de la cité (« Fort Salmanazar »). Les deux tells, qui étaient isolés du reste de la ville par leur propre enceinte, ont concentré l'essentiel des efforts des archéologues. La ville basse devait comprendre l'essentiel de l'espace résidentiel, artisanal et commercial ; elle n'a que très peu été explorée. Les capitales assyriennes suivantes, Dur-Sharrukin (Khorsabad) et Ninive, reprirent cette même organisation spatiale.

Les palais de l'acropole
L'acropole de la cité de Kalkhu comprenait de nombreux palais royaux (sept suivant les interprétations des équipes d'archéologues ayant fouillé le tell), érigés successivement par plusieurs souverains assyriens entre le IXe et le VIIe siècle av. J.-C. Le plus ancien et le plus vaste, le « Palais nord-ouest » construit sous Assurnasirpal II, est le mieux connu par les fouilles, encore qu'il n'ait pas été complètement dégagé. Les autres sont moins bien connus, et il est parfois malaisé d'interpréter le rôle des pièces fouillées, ou même les relations entre les différents édifices.

Le Palais nord-ouest
Le « Palais nord-ouest » des archéologues fut bâti sous le règne d'Assurnasirpal II, puis été sans doute achevé par son fils Salmanazar III et occupé jusqu'au VIIe siècle av. J.-C. comme l'attestent les tombes royales qui y ont été trouvées. Ses dimensions étaient d'environ 200 mètres de long sur peut-être 120 mètres de large, et il devait couvrir environ 28 000 m2. On y repère l'organisation classique des palais royaux assyriens. Il s'étendait peut-être beaucoup plus à l'est, vers le centre du tell, dans une partie non fouillée.
La partie nord du palais était le babānu, la zone publique. Cette zone, mise au jour au XIXe siècle et très détériorée par l'érosion, était desservie par la porte principale du palais, située à l'est, et sans doute aussi par une entrée de service sur son côté nord. Elle était organisée autour d'une vaste cour (environ 90 × 60 mètres) desservant plusieurs magasins et le secteur administratif, dont les bureaux de l'intendant du palais, sans doute situés au nord-est de la cour principale, ainsi que les archives, dont une partie était entreposée dans une pièce au nord-ouest de la cour (les « Lettres de Nimroud », environ 300 tablettes de la correspondance de Teglath-Phalasar III et Sargon II, seconde moitié du VIIIe siècle av. J.-C.).
La cour principale ouvrait par trois portes monumentales flanquées de taureaux ailés sur une salle du trône rectangulaire, mesurant 45 mètres de longueur sur 15 de largeur. De là, on accédait à un vestibule ouvrant sur la partie sud du palais, le bitānu, la zone privée, à laquelle l'accès était strictement limité. Autour d'une cour mesurant 32 mètres sur 27, on trouvait des pièces de réception à l'ouest, des pièces ayant pu avoir une fonction cérémonielle à l'est, et les appartements royaux (dont le harem) au sud, comprenant également des pièces d'eau et des cuisines. C'est dans cette partie méridionale, dégagée lors des fouilles britanniques et irakiennes du XXe siècle, que furent découvertes les chambres funéraires voûtées comprenant les sarcophages de plusieurs reines avec leur trésor (voir plus bas), trois autres chambres voûtées ayant manifestement servi de sépultures mais retrouvées vides, plusieurs puits ayant livré de nombreux ivoires, ainsi qu'un dans lequel furent retrouvés de nombreux restes humains devant avoir été jetés là lors de la prise de la ville (voir plus haut).

Les autres palais
Plusieurs édifices palatiaux ont été repérés sur la partie ouest du tell, mais en raison de leur état de dégradation souvent avancé et du fait que toutes les zones n'ont pas été fouillées, il est assez difficile de comprendre les relations qui les unissent. Ils sont en général considérés comme des édifices séparés nommés en fonction de leur emplacement. D. Kertai, qui décrit cette situation comme un « cauchemar archéologique », a proposé des regroupements en distinguant deux grands ensembles palatiaux : des unités rattachées (au moins physiquement si ce n'est fonctionnellement) au Palais nord-ouest construit par Assurnasirpal, érigées sur sa partie sud sous Adad-nerari III ; un palais sud-ouest construit par Teglath-Phalasar III, puis reconstruit au même emplacement par Assarhaddon.
Adad-nerari III délaissa le Palais nord-ouest au profit d'un palais ou d'une extension ce celui-ci qu'il fit construire au sud de ce dernier. C'est dans cette zone que Layard avait dégagé un espace de réception et/ou de résidence richement orné et aujourd'hui érodé, qu'il avait qualifié de « chambres hautes ». Ce palais a fait l'objet de fouilles plus importantes conduites par les archéologues irakiens, qui y ont retrouvé des restes de peintures murales mais aucun bas-relief.
Teglath-Phalasar III édifia à son tour un nouveau palais, le « Palais central », parce que des restes de son décor ont été localisés dans la partie centrale du tell, mais les inscriptions de ce roi indiquent qu'ils surplombaient le Tigre, ce qui a laissé penser qu'il s'étendait sur tout le sud-ouest du tell. Aucune trace de son architecture n'a été identifiée, mais les textes indiquent qu'on y trouvait des bâtiments à portiques d'inspiration syrienne, bit-hilani. Cette absence de traces architecturales pourrait être liée aux travaux postérieurs d'Assarhaddon au même endroit, lorsqu'il voulut construire à son tour un palais à Nimroud. Il s'y servit en matériaux pour ériger le « Palais sud-ouest », y prenant des bas-reliefs ainsi que des dallages. D'autres bas-reliefs furent pris dans le Palais nord-ouest. Le palais d'Assarhaddon semble néanmoins n'avoir jamais été achevé : plusieurs bas-reliefs ont été retrouvés là où ils avaient été entassés à ce moment mais jamais réutilisés, tandis que d'autres furent déplacés dans le nouveau palais mais jamais accrochés aux murs. Une des particularités du Palais sud-ouest était la présence de pièces de réception avec deux passages, gardés par deux taureaux ailés colossaux suivant la formule classique, mais ici avec entre les deux une paire de colonnes dont la base avait la forme de sphinx ; des colonnes se trouvaient également aux extrémités des suites. Cette organisation est manifestement d'inspiration syrienne (bit-hilani).
Au sud-est se trouve le « Palais brûlé », qui doit son nom au fait qu'il fut dévasté par un incendie. Cet édifice a une histoire complexe : il semble avoir un antécédent dès la fin du IIe millénaire av. J.-C., puis il fut réoccupé à l'époque hellénistique, présentant la plus longue séquence archéologique parmi les édifices du tell. Il fut (re)construit sous Assurnasirpal II, puis plusieurs fois restauré, par Adad-nerari III semble-t-il, puis surtout sous Sargon II qui résida peut-être au moment de la construction de sa nouvelle capitale, Dur-Sharrukin. Le « palais brûlé » s'organisait autour d'une grande cour accessible depuis le nord par un vestibule ; une salle du trône a été repérée du côté sud. Le « Palais sud-est », situé plus au sud, est moins bien connu. On y a seulement repéré quelques pièces, qui semblent correspondre à une salle du trône et à ses annexes.
Enfin, le « Palais du gouverneur », situé vers le centre du tell, fut peut-être édifié sous Salmanazar III ou sous son petit-fils Adad-nerari III. Il fut dégagé sur une zone d'environ 50 × 50 mètres, ce qui permit de repérer un ensemble de pièces organisées autour d'une cour intérieure selon la formule classique des palais assyriens, et décorées de peintures. Cet édifice doit son nom aux tablettes (environ 230) qui y ont été exhumées, comprenant pour partie des archives des gouverneurs de la ville (notamment Bel-tarsi-ilumma, en fonction au début du VIIIe siècle av. J.-C.). Il a été mis au jour dans un édifice partiellement dégagé du tell principal, qui pourrait donc avoir été le palais des gouverneurs. Il s'agit de documents administratifs et aussi de lettres. On y apprend que les provinces sont gérées avec l'aide de plusieurs administrateurs subalternes, pour beaucoup des eunuques, qui comprend des personnes chargées de l'intendance du palais, des administrateurs implantés dans les villes et villages, et des officiers militaires. Les affaires militaires sont une part importante des fonctions des gouverneurs : ils doivent mobiliser hommes et ressources pour l'armée, et dirigent eux-mêmes des troupes lors des conflits de l'époque. Une partie des archives documente aussi les affaires privées des gouverneurs, qui font partie de l'élite du royaume et reçoivent du roi ou achètent des domaines agricoles importants, y compris dans d'autres provinces. Mais il n'est pas assuré que cet édifice ait pour autant servi de résidence aux gouverneurs de la ville, en raison de la nature aussi bien publique que privée des archives et du fait qu'elles ne forment pas un corpus homogène qui permettrait d'identifier la fonction des occupants du palais.

Les temples
La citadelle de Kalkhu comprenait plusieurs temples, ce qui témoigne de la volonté de ses rois d'en faire un centre religieux majeur de l'empire assyrien. Assurnasirpal II prétendit dans ses inscriptions en avoir restauré neuf, dont seuls quatre ou cinq d'entre eux ont été fouillés.

L'un des plus importants est le temple de Ninurta, un dieu guerrier qui symbolisait la victoire et qui était très vénéré par les souverains assyriens. Il est situé au nord-ouest de l'acropole, juste au nord du Palais nord-ouest, et peut-être même accolé à ce dernier, au point qu'il est difficile de déterminer à quel édifice appartiennent certaines pièces (des magasins) mises au jour lors de fouilles. On a exhumé à côté de son entrée nord une grande stèle portant une inscription commémorative d'Assurnasirpal II, ainsi que des restes de peintures murales. À cet édifice était accolée une ziggurat, dont la base carrée mesurait 60 mètres de côté et dont les ruines dominaient encore le site au moment des fouilles. Aucun escalier extérieur n'ayant été retrouvé, l'accès à son sommet devait se faire depuis le temple par un escalier intérieur qui a disparu depuis.

À l'est du temple de Ninurta se trouvait un autre temple (ou une simple chapelle) dédié à la déesse Ishtar sous sa forme dite Šarrat nipḫi, qui signifie quelque chose comme la « Reine lumineuse/flamboyante » (probablement en lien avec l'aspect astral de la déesse). Deux de ses entrées ont été identifiées et étaient gardées par des statues de lions colossales. Un temple dédié à la déesse Gula, non fouillé, devait se trouver à l'est de cet édifice.
Au sud-est de ces deux temples, à une centaine de mètres en direction du centre du tell, se trouvait un autre sanctuaire dédié à la « Maîtresse du Kidmuru », apparemment une autre forme de la déesse Ishtar. D'après les inscriptions d'Assurnasirpal II, ce temple existait déjà quand il fit de Kalkhu sa capitale, et il entreprit de le restaurer. L'édifice abritait une statue en or rouge de la déesse. On y a retrouvé un piédestal dédié au dieu Enlil, également vénéré dans ce temple à côté d'autres dieux (sans doute Shamash, et peut-être aussi Assur).
Dans la zone centrale du tell, un autre édifice, le « Bâtiment central » date du règne d'Assurnasirpal II et semble avoir également été un temple, même si l'on ignore à quel dieu il était attribué. Il n'a pas fait l'objet de fouilles importantes et n'est que très mal connu. Il a néanmoins livré des découvertes remarquables : des taureaux ailés gardant ses portes, des bas-reliefs associés, et surtout l'« obélisque noir » de Salmanazar III (voir plus bas).

Le deuxième grand temple de Nimroud était celui de Nabû (nommé l'Ezida, le « temple pur » en sumérien), le dieu de la sagesse particulièrement vénéré en Assyrie. Il était localisé au sud-est du tell, près du palais du gouverneur. C'est le sanctuaire le mieux connu par les fouilles, et il a fait récemment l'objet de travaux de restauration. On y pénétrait depuis une porte située au nord-est, gardée par des statues de pierre (à l'origine recouvertes de feuilles d'or selon un texte exhumé dans le Fort Salmanazar), qui représentaient des sages primordiaux appelés apkallu, des hommes à corps de poissons. De là on accédait aux deux cours principales du temple, disposées sur son côté est. La seconde, au sud, ouvrait sur son côté sud sur deux vestibules conduisant à deux cellae jumelles dédiées à Nabû et à sa parèdre Tashmetu. La partie nord-ouest de l'édifice comprenait une cour secondaire ouvrant sur une sorte de salle du trône, ainsi que deux pièces qui semblent être des répliques des deux cellae. Celles-ci devaient servir pour des rituels majeurs, sans doute la fête akitu qui apparaît dans plusieurs tablettes relatives à ce sanctuaire et qui se conclut par un rituel de mariage sacré du couple divin. Plusieurs objets en ivoire et de nombreuses tablettes furent mis au jour dans le temple de Nabû. L'une des salles qui jouxte la grande cour sud est une véritable bibliothèque, contenant environ 300 tablettes datées du VIIe siècle av. J.-C. Celles-ci servaient aux prêtres exorcistes (āšipu) du temple, en majorité des textes d'exorcisme ou de divination, mais aussi des listes lexicales et des hymnes caractéristiques de la culture des lettrés assyriens. La « salle du trône » du nord-ouest livra quant à elle plusieurs tablettes contenant des traités politiques (adê) passés entre Assarhaddon et des chefs mèdes. Les dieux étant les garants de ce type de serment, il était courant d'en conserver des copies dans les temples. L'activité du sanctuaire est également documentée par des lettres adressées par ses responsables au roi Assarhaddon, mises au jour à Ninive, devenue capitale de l'empire, qui documentent son activité cultuelle, notamment la fête majeure du mariage sacré (hiérogamie) entre Nabû et Tashmetu. Quelques tablettes du VIIe siècle av. J.-C. documentent enfin la vie économique du sanctuaire : deux tablettes enregistrant la réception de dons d'esclaves et de terres, et quelques notes de dettes concernant des prêts en grain.

Fort Salmanazar
À l'angle sud-est de la ville, sur le tell Tulul al-Azar, se trouvait un édifice palatial daté du règne de Salmanazar III, qui appartient à la catégorie des arsenaux (ekal mašarti, littéralement « palais de la revue (militaire) »). Il fut réaménagé plus tard par Assarhaddon. En raison de sa fonction militaire, les fouilleurs du site l'ont appelé « Fort Salmanazar », mais il avait également la fonction de palais royal. D'autres édifices militaires semblables ont également été identifiés à Dur-Sharrukin et à Ninive, situés eux aussi sur des terrasses à l'écart des acropoles de ces cités qui comprenaient les principaux temples et palais.
L'arsenal de Kalkhu est le mieux connu de ceux des capitales assyriennes. Il était intégré à l'intérieur d'une enceinte dont il occupait l'angle sud-est. Le reste de l'enceinte était une vaste esplanade, qui devait servir pour les rassemblements les plus importants qui précédaient les campagnes militaires. Le palais proprement dit mesurait 350 × 250 mètres environ, soit à peu près 7,5 hectares. Sa partie nord était organisée autour de trois grandes cours (la plus vaste mesurant 90 × 100 mètres), qui servaient sans doute pour les revues militaires (un podium servant pour le trône royal a été identifié dans l'une d'elles). La porte la mieux connue de l'édifice, située du côté ouest, était défendue par deux imposantes tours ; son passage était voûté, mesurant 4 mètres de large et sans doute autant de haut. Les pièces voisines des grandes cours de parade étaient des ateliers servant à fabriquer et réparer les armes et équipements militaires, des entrepôts servant à stocker ces mêmes objets ainsi que le tribut (ce qui explique que cet édifice ait été un important lieu de découvertes d'objets en ivoire), ainsi que des bureaux du secteur administratif dirigé par l'intendant de l'édifice, qui y disposait également d'appartements. La partie sud de l'édifice, qui s'ouvrait sur deux cours bordées par la muraille de la citadelle, était celle des appartements royaux. Elle comprenait tout comme le palais royal principal une salle du trône rectangulaire (à l'est, dans le secteur public) qui disposait sur un petit côté d'une estrade aux bords sculptés de bas-reliefs sur laquelle devait se trouver le trône royal. Une partie privée était également constituée de plusieurs salles et de petites cours intérieures (à l'ouest). Plusieurs pièces étaient décorées de bas-reliefs sur pierre, des peintures et des briques glaçurées. Les archives d'une reine assyrienne ont été mises au jour dans cette partie de l'édifice. Parmi les autres tablettes cunéiformes exhumées dans cet édifice se trouvent des listes de distribution de biens pour l'entretien de dignitaires de la cour et de pays étrangers (« Nimrud Wine Lists »), ainsi que d'autres concernant des chevaux et d'autres unités de l'armée assyrienne (« Nimrud Horse Lists »).

Les autres édifices fouillés
Plusieurs autres édifices ont été fouillés sur le tell de Nimroud et dans la ville basse.
Un « bâtiment de Salmanazar », construit par Salmanazar III, a été identifié au sud du palais nord-ouest, par deux taureaux ailés inscrits au nom de ce roi. La nature de l'édifice n'est pas connue. Plutôt qu'un palais, il pourrait s'agir d'un temple.
Le « Bâtiment de 1950 », du nom de l'année de sa découverte, situé à l'est du palais nord-ouest, a été partiellement dégagé, permettant l'identification de pièces de réception et de magasins, ainsi que des peintures murales, ce qui pourrait le faire ranger dans la catégorie des palais secondaires.
Plusieurs résidences adossées à l'enceinte intérieure ont été fouillées par Mallowan à l'extrémité nord-est du tell. Il y mit au jour une cinquantaine de pièces et identifia six résidences, organisées autour de cours intérieures selon un schéma courant dans les résidences assyriennes aisées. Il pourrait en fait n'y avoir eu que deux vastes résidences, au moins dans la dernière phase d'existence du site, sous Assurbanipal (VIIe siècle av. J.-C.). C'est en tout cas de cette époque que date le lot de tablettes privées d'un des occupants de ces résidences, Shamash-sharru-usur, un eunuque de la cour royale, et qui documentent les activités économiques (commerce, usure, gestion de terres).
Dans la ville basse, deux édifices palatiaux furent mis au jour dans les années 1950, à l'organisation interne classique : l'un qui date du règne d'Adad-nerari III et qui livra notamment des peintures murales, et un autre apparemment construit sous le règne d'Assurbanipal ou après (donc dans la seconde moitié du VIIe siècle av. J.-C.).

Les découvertes artistiques
Les fouilles des palais et temples de Nimroud ont livré de nombreux objets d'une grande qualité artistique : œuvres taillées dans de l'ivoire ou de la nacre, vaisselle de luxe en métal, céramique fine destinée aux élites du royaume (« Palace Ware »), poterie peinte en matières vitreuses (glaçurée), figurines de terre cuite, etc.
Le site se distingue plus particulièrement par trois types de découvertes qui sont plus longuement présentées ici : les sculptures qui  ornaient les palais royaux (surtout le palais nord-ouest) et les temples, en particulier les statues colossales gardiennes de portes et les bas-reliefs sur dalles de pierre (orthostates) ; les centaines d'objets en ivoire finement taillés provenant des pays vassaux occidentaux du royaume assyrien ; la découverte plus récente, mais tout aussi marquante, de tombes de reines assyriennes, qui ont livré de nombreux objets en métaux précieux d'une qualité d'exécution remarquable.

Le décor des palais royaux et des temples
Le décor des palais et des temples de Kalkhu bâtis sous le règne d'Assurnasirpal II marque un tournant dans l'histoire de l'art assyrien, avec l'apparition ou du moins le développement d'une statuaire monumentale et de longues séries de bas-reliefs sculptées sur des orthostates en pierre, caractéristiques des derniers temps de l'empire assyrien. Ils ont sans doute des précurseurs dans des palais des règnes antérieurs et surtout ceux réaménagés par le même roi au début de son règne, le Vieux Palais d'Assur et un palais mal connu de Ninive, qui comprenait des orthostates peints et non sculptés, des reliefs de briques glaçurées ainsi que, pour le premier, des fragments de statues de génies gardiens de portes. Ces formes d'art sont manifestement marquées par les traditions des contrées occidentales vaincues par Assurnasirpal II lors de ses campagnes en Syrie septentrionale et vers le littoral méditerranéen (et d'où il a dû déporter des sculpteurs). On a en effet exhumé des sculptures d'animaux hybrides, génies, divinités mais aussi humains sur des sites palatiaux et religieux datés des XIe – IXe siècle av. J.-C. et relevant des sphères culturelles néo-hittite et araméenne (Karkemish, Zincirli, Arslantepe, Karatepe, Tell Halaf, Alep, etc.). Ces influences rejoignent les traditions artistiques d'Assyrie et de Babylonie, pour former un résultat original, le projet artistique et architectural ambitieux du monarque assyrien, visant à exprimer sa puissance et la recherche de la protection divine, offrant des moyens importants aux artisans des palais de Kalkhu.
Les entrées et les passages intérieurs les plus importants des palais et des temples de Kalkhu étaient gardés par des paires de statues colossales de génies protecteurs. Les plus courants sont de loin les créatures quadrupèdes ailées à têtes humaines, hauts de plus de 3 mètres pour les plus imposants, ayant pour certains le corps d'un lion, et pour d'autres celui d'un taureau. Ils portent la tiare à cornes caractéristique des divinités. Ils représentent des esprits protecteurs, que les textes désignent sous les termes šēdu (sumérien dalad) et lamassu (sumérien dlamma). Dans le cas du temple d'Ishtar šarrat nipḫi, ce sont des statues (de plus de 2 mètres de haut) de lions, l'animal attribut de la déesse, qui gardent les portes. Ces statues ont la particularité de porter cinq pattes pour les animaux : de façon qu'on en voie quatre quand on les observe de côté (l'animal est alors vu marchant), et deux quand on les observe de face (l'animal est alors vu en posture d'attente). Dans le temple de Nabû, l'entrée est gardée par des statues de divinités de forme humaine, sans doute des génies associés au dieu principal.

La présence de ces statues et de celles d'autres esprits protecteurs qui ornaient l'édifice devait assurer sa défense magique, en le dotant de puluḫtu, la capacité à susciter la terreur chez les forces malfaisantes. Leur importance ressort bien dans une inscription commémorant la construction du palais central par Teglath-Phalasar III :

« Je plaçai à ses portes (du palais) des statues de lions colossaux, de šēdu et de lamassu, dont l'apparence est exécutée avec grand art et splendidement revêtus, et je les ai érigées aux entrées pour l'émerveillement (de tous). Je posai des dalles de gypse et d'albâtre à leurs pieds et ainsi je fis resplendir les issues (de l'édifice). Et je plaçai des images de pierre, gardiens des grands dieux, créatures de l'apsû, autour des murs de soutènement (du palais) et les rendis ainsi « terrifiques ». »

— Inscription de Teglath-Phalasar III.
L'autre type de sculptures qui ornaient les palais et les temples de Nimroud est l'ensemble des bas-reliefs réalisés sur des plaques en albâtre gypseux, appelées « orthostates », et fixées sur les murs de nombreuses pièces de ces édifices. Cette forme d'art offrait la possibilité de construire un programme décoratif complexe, introduisant en particulier des scènes narratives, même si cela était encore peu exploité dans le premier palais qui les emploie, et qui représentait à foison les figures apotropaïques que sont les génies ailés à têtes d'hommes ou de rapaces, souvent associés à des arbres sacrés, et qui intégraient parfois le souverain à la représentation.
Le programme de la salle du trône de l'édifice (ou salle B, dont la plupart des reliefs sont aujourd'hui au British Museum), de forme rectangulaire, a été étudié en détail. Ses entrées étaient gardées par des couples de statues de lions et de taureaux androcéphales ailés, accompagnés de bas-reliefs de génies protecteurs ailés. Le relief du petit côté est de la salle, qui surplombait le trône royal, représentait deux fois le roi suivi d'un génie protecteur, symétriquement de part et d'autre d'un arbre sacré, au-dessus duquel une divinité est représentée dans un disque ailé, identifiée comme étant soit le dieu national Assur, ou le dieu-soleil Shamash. La même scène est représentée sur le mur situé face à l'entrée de la pièce, soulignant son caractère remarquable. Elle est également reproduite sur un sceau-cylindre appartenant à un vassal du roi assyrien, le roi de Shadikanni, ce qui indique qu'elle avait été diffusée afin de glorifier Assurnasirpal II, le sceau étant probablement un présent du roi à son vassal.

Les deux côtés longs de la salle étaient couverts de bas-reliefs disposés en deux registres. Sur le mur sud, le mieux conservé, à proximité du trône, se trouvaient des scènes représentant le souverain chassant des lions et des taureaux, symbolisant sa capacité à triompher des forces de la nature. Les autres bas-reliefs représentaient essentiellement des scènes de combat, illustration des victoires remportées par les troupes assyriennes dans la région du Moyen-Euphrate et en Syrie. Le panneau 17 figure ainsi sur le registre supérieur des soldats assyriens nageant en direction d'une cité ennemie assiégée, sans doute sur l'Euphrate (au pays de Suhu ?) et le registre inférieur montre des prisonniers de guerre et le tribut. Des porteurs de tribut étaient également représentés sur les murs de la partie ouest de la pièce. Ces scènes visaient donc à donner l'image d'un royaume puissant et victorieux, et à signifier aux envoyés des pays étrangers venus rendre hommage au roi assyrien dans sa salle du trône ce qu'il en coûterait de se révolter contre lui.

Les sculptures des édifices assyriens étaient constamment associées à des textes royaux. Les bas-reliefs et les statues du palais nord-ouest sont ainsi tous traversés par une copie de l'Inscription Standard. Il a même été tenté de faire correspondre le programme iconographique de la salle du trône avec le contenu de cette inscription, qui évoque pareillement la puissance du roi, son respect des divinités, ses conquêtes militaires, et plus largement sa capacité à instaurer et à maintenir l'ordre dans le monde que lui ont confié les grands dieux. Le développement de bas-reliefs narratifs relatant des campagnes militaires ou des chasses royales a été mis en parallèle avec l'essor de la littérature annalistique assyrienne qui met en avant les mêmes faits. Cela ressort plus nettement dans les bas-reliefs du palais central de Teglath-Phalasar III, où les bas-reliefs représentant les triomphes militaires du souverain (en particulier la prise de la ville d'Astartu) étaient disposés sur deux registres séparés par des inscriptions de type annalistique relatant également des victoires assyriennes (mais non représentées).

Les statues les mieux conservées des monuments de Nimroud ont été pour la plupart expédiées au British Museum, où elles sont aujourd'hui exposées. La majeure partie des bas-reliefs exhumés dans le palais nord-ouest (environ 600 répertoriés) ont été extraits du site depuis leur découverte, et se trouvent en premier lieu au British Museum, qui dispose des œuvres les plus remarquables, mais sont aussi répartis dans des musées et institutions de plusieurs pays, ainsi que chez des personnes privées, Layard en ayant vendu un certain nombre afin de financer ses fouilles. Mais il en restait beaucoup sur le site au moment de sa destruction par l’État islamique (en particulier dans la salle S dont la destruction est attestée par des vidéos). Certains de ces bas-reliefs ont fait l'objet de transactions pour des montants élevés sur le marché des antiquités, ce qui ne manque pas de soulever des controverses dans un contexte de pillage des sites archéologiques irakiens.

Les sculptures de pierre sont les réalisations artistiques des édifices de Nimroud qui ont le mieux résisté aux épreuves du temps, en raison de leur plus grande solidité. Les archéologues ont également mis au jour en plusieurs endroits des décorations murales qui complétaient ces sculptures, qui ne couvraient qu'une partie des murs de ces édifices. Il s'agit d'abord de peintures sur plâtre (essentiellement dans le Palais nord-ouest, le Fort Salmanazar et le palais de la ville basse), qui représentent notamment des motifs géométriques et floraux, mais aussi en certains endroits des personnages et des animaux. Cela renvoie manifestement à l'idée d'abondance, à la prospérité du royaume. Ont également été trouvées des briques émaillées, qui constituaient un décor particulièrement apprécié dans l'ancienne Mésopotamie. Un panneau remarquable, qui mesurait à l'origine environ 4 mètres de haut, a été exhumé dans les appartements royaux du Fort Salmanazar. Il portait une double représentation du souverain Salmanazar III sous un disque solaire ailé, encadré par plusieurs frises formant une arche qui le surplombait, et garnie de représentations florales et animales. Enfin, comme cela est évoqué dans les inscriptions de fondation de ces édifices, ils disposaient également de portes, de charpente et de colonnes en bois précieux importé des montagnes de Syrie et du Liban (cèdre et cyprès notamment), ainsi que des éléments de décoration en métal (cuivre, bronze, fer, argent, or) qui disparurent également lors du pillage de la cité.
Sans être pour autant des éléments intégrés dans le décor des palais et temples, plusieurs sculptures indépendantes ont été découvertes dans des édifices de Nimroud où elles avaient été placées et qui sont exposées au British Museum : une statue d'Assurnasirpal II (1,13 m de haut) trouvée dans le temple d'Ishtar šarrat nipḫi, une stèle représentant le même roi mise au jour dans le temple de Ninurta, une autre représentant Shamshi-Adad V exhumée dans le temple de Nabû, et enfin l'obélisque noir de Salmanazar III découvert dans le palais nord-ouest. Ce monolithe en calcaire noir haut de près de 2 mètres porte sur ses quatre faces des inscriptions et des bas-reliefs décrivant plusieurs campagnes conduites par les troupes de ce souverain et le butin qui en a résulté. L'obélisque noir est connu en particulier pour porter une représentation du roi d'Israël Jéhu prosterné devant le souverain assyrien.

Les ivoires
Les bâtiments de Nimroud ont livré plus de 5 000 fragments et objets d'ivoire, une collection beaucoup plus importante que celles des autres sites contemporains de la période assyrienne. Les principaux lieux de leur découverte sont les puits du palais nord-ouest et les magasins de Fort Salmanazar. La plupart de ces objets étaient issus des ateliers des régions occidentales, d'où ils furent importés à la suite de pillages ou de la perception de tributs. De ce fait, on distingue plusieurs styles en fonction de leur provenance géographique : 

un style phénicien, caractérisé par sa forte inspiration égyptienne (« pharaons », sphinx, griffons, lions, vaches, personnages d'apparence « africaine ») ;
un style « nord-syrien », similaire à celui des bas-reliefs des cités néo-hittites (personnages héroïques face à des plantes, sphinx et autres créatures hybrides, arbres stylisés, etc.) ;
un style « intermédiaire » syrien, marqué par l'influence égyptienne.
Quelques pièces présentent un style proprement assyrien (le roi, des dignitaires, une chasse royale) et ont été retrouvées à proximité des salles de réception royales. Ceci semble indiquer qu'il s'agissait d’éléments du mobilier d'apparat du souverain (le trône ?), l'art de l'ivoire étant très prisé à la cour assyrienne ; les objets des styles occidentaux étaient apparemment cantonnés aux espaces de stockage du butin et non exposés publiquement. La majorité des pièces retrouvées sont des fragments décorant des meubles, dont la structure en bois a disparu. Certains conservent encore des incrustations de pierres précieuses, comme celle représentant une lionne dévorant un Africain, de style phénicien, comportant encore une partie de ses incrustations en lapis-lazuli, cornaline, ainsi que des traces de feuilles d'or. Il ne s'agit donc pas du travail isolé d'artisans spécialisés dans l'ivoire, mais de celui de plusieurs spécialistes, dont des ébénistes et des orfèvres. D'autres objets en ivoire avaient un usage cosmétique (boîtes à fard de type pyxide, palettes). Ont également été retrouvées des tablettes en ivoire, qui étaient à l'origine couvertes de cire pour pouvoir être inscrites.

Les ivoires de Nimroud découverts lors des premières fouilles britanniques sont en partie conservés au British Museum (qui a reçu et acquis une partie du fonds du BISI en 2011). Ceux exhumés lors des fouilles qui ont suivi l'indépendance de l'Irak étaient conservés au Musée de Bagdad, où ils subirent d'importantes dégradations lors du pillage de l'établissement en 2003.

Les tombes des reines
La zone privée du palais nord-ouest a livré une des plus remarquables découvertes archéologiques de la Mésopotamie antique qui eut lieu entre 1988 et 1990 sous la conduite des équipes de fouilles irakiennes, dans la partie sud de l'édifice. Quatre chambres souterraines aux plafonds en forme de voûtes en berceau précédées d'antichambres furent successivement mises au jour :

la tombe I, qui contenait un sarcophage en terre cuite dans lequel reposait la dépouille d'une femme décédée dans sa cinquantaine et dont l'identité n'a pu être déterminée car il n'y avait pas d'inscriptions. Un autre cercueil d'une femme a également été trouvé dans l'antichambre de cette tombe ;
la tombe II, dont le sarcophage contenait les corps de deux femmes. Le trésor qui y a été trouvé mentionne toutefois les noms de trois reines : la première enterrée avec certitude est Yaba, épouse de Teglath-Phalasar III ; la seconde est soit Banitu, épouse de Salmanazar V, soit Ataliya, épouse de Sargon II. Si l'on suit la logique chronologique, il s'agirait plutôt de la seconde, qui aurait acquis les biens de la première (car on suppose que son époux a renversé celui de la précédente) ;
la tombe III, qui contenait le sarcophage de Mullissu-mukannishat-Ninua, épouse d'Assurnasirpal II et mère de Salmanazar III. Elle a manifestement été pillée dès l'Antiquité, peut-être même juste après l'inhumation. Mais les pillards ont remis en place la dalle d'entrée et n'ont pas eu le temps de prendre tous les objets précieux. La chambre est scindée en deux à un moment, pour former une antichambre où ont été retrouvés trois cercueils de bronze plus tardifs (100 à 150 ans plus tard, d'après les inscriptions figurant sur les objets découverts) qui renfermaient les ossements de 13 individus : dans le premier reposaient une femme, un fœtus et quatre enfants, dans le second une femme et un enfant, dans le troisième trois hommes et deux femmes adultes. D'après le sceau qui y a été retrouvé, le sarcophage le plus richement pourvu (le n°2) est celui de Hama, épouse de Salmanazar IV (783-773), mais des poids inscrits au nom de Teglath-Phalasar III (745-727) ont aussi été mis au jour dans la tombe, qui semble donc avoir été rouverte et utilisée à nouveau à cette période ;
la tombe IV, qui contenait un sarcophage dont le corps de l'occupant a quasiment disparu, sans inscription permettant de la dater.
D'autres tombes royales assyriennes avaient déjà été mises au jour à Assur, le seul lieu de sépulture connu de souverains assyriens, dont celui d'Assurnasirpal II malgré sa présence plus active à Kalkhu. Mais aucune n'avait été découverte intacte, alors que les tombes de Nimroud sont restées inviolées et ont livré une quantité impressionnante d'objets de luxe. La tombe de Mullissu-mukannishat-Ninua (la n°III) a été pillée, mais le matériel trouvé dans son antichambre est très riche, dans le sarcophage en bronze de la reine Hama : une couronne en or, des colliers en or incrustés de pierres précieuses, des boucles d'oreilles, des bracelets, de la vaisselle dans le même métal, des colliers en agate, le tout d'une grande qualité d'exécution. La tombe II présente également un ensemble remarquable d'objets, parmi lesquels une autre couronne en or, un diadème en fil d'or, des chevillères et brassières en or, des ornements en or cousus à l'origine sur des vêtements (dont un ensemble de cinquante étoiles), de la vaisselle en or et en cristal de roche. La tombe I a elle aussi livré une grande quantité de bijoux : colliers d'or et de pierres précieuses, boucles d'oreilles, fibules et anneaux en or finement ciselés, vaisselle en bronze et en cuivre. La tombe IV a livré un matériel funéraire moins riche (peu d'objets en or), mais varié (bijoux, vaisselle).

Les objets exhumés dans les tombes de Nimroud ont été placés dans une pièce de la Banque centrale d'Irak en 1991 afin de les mettre en sécurité au moment de la Première guerre du Golfe, à côté d'autres pièces majeures du Musée de Bagdad comme des objets des tombes royales d'Ur. Ils n'en sont sortis qu'en 2003, à l'issue de la Seconde guerre du Golfe, échappant ainsi au pillage du musée.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Introductions
(en) John Curtis, « Nimrud », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 4, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 141-144
Laura Battini et Pierre Villard, « Kalhu », dans F. Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, 2001, p. 437-440.

Nimroud/Kalkhu
(en) John Nicholas Postgate et Julian E. Reade, « Kalḫu », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. V, Berlin, De Gruyter, 1976-1980, p. 303-323.
(en) Joan Oates et David Oates, Nimrud : an Assyrian imperial city revealed, Londres, British School of archaeology in Iraq, 2001, 309 p. (ISBN 0-903472-25-2, lire en ligne)
(en) John E. Curtis, Henrietta McCall, Dominique Collon et Lamia al-Gailani Werr (dir.), New Light on Nimrud : proceedings of the Nimrud Conference 11th-13th March 2002, London, British Museum, Londres, British School of archaeology in Iraq et British Museum, 2008, 297 p. (ISBN 978-0-903472-24-1, lire en ligne)
(en) Julian E. Reade, « The Ziggurrat and Temples of Nimrud », Iraq, vol. 64,‎ 2002, p. 135-216.

Assyrie
(en) John E. Curtis et Julian Reade, Art and Empire : Treasures from Assyria in the British Museum, New York, British Museum Press, 1995
Fastes des palais assyriens : Au nouvel empire, Dijon, coll. « Les dossiers d'archéologie n° 171 », mai 1992
(en) A. Kirk Grayson, The Royal inscriptions of Mesopotamia. Assyrian periods Vol. 2 : Assyrian Rulers of the First Millennium B.C. (1114-859 B.C.), Toronto, Buffalo et Londres, University of Toronto Press, 1991
(en) Friedhelm Pedde, « The Assyrian Heartland », dans Daniel T. Potts (dir.), A Companion to the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East, Malden et Oxford, Blackwell Publishers, coll. « Blackwell companions to the ancient world », 2012, p. 851-866.
(en) John M. Russell, « Assyrian Cities and Architecture », dans Eckart Frahm (dir.), A Companion to Assyria, Malden, Wiley-Blackwell, 2017, p. 423-452.
(en) Karen Radner, Ancient Assyria : A Very Short Introduction, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2015
(en) David Kertai, The Architecture of Late Assyrian Royal Palaces, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2015

Voir aussi
Articles connexes
Destruction du patrimoine culturel par l'État islamique
Nimrod
Iconoclasme, Vandalisme

Liens externes

(en) « Nimrud (ancient: Kalhu/Calah) », sur U.S. Department of Defense Legacy Resource Mangement Program (DoDLRMP)
(en) « Nimrud: Materialities of Assyrian Knowledge Production », sur The Nimrud Project at Oracc.org
(en) Karen Radner & Jamie Novotny, « Neo-Assyrian Archival Texts from Kalhu », sur Neo-Assyrian Archival Texts from Kalhu, The ATAE/Kalhu Project, a sub-project of MOCCI, 2022 (consulté le 22 février 2022)
(en) Palais nord ouest sur learningsites
(en) Audio-intervivew sur archaelogychannel

Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste indicative du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online 
Reconstitution du palais par le Metropolitan Museum of Art de New York (2 min 55 s)

 Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Mésopotamie   Portail de l’Irak


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 2,422
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Nimrud
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Mosul (Arabic: الموصل‎ al-Mawṣil, Maṣlawī Arabic: al-Mōṣul, Assyrian: ܢܝܢܘܐ  Ninaweh, Kurdish: Mosul/Ninawa, Turkish: Musul) is a city in Iraq's Northwestern region, and is the country's second largest city by population. Its religious makeup is one of the most diverse in the country.

## Understand
Mosul is Iraq's second largest city and the major economic hub in northern Iraq. Located along the fertile lands of river Tigris the city's history dates back to at least 6,000 BC. On the eastern banks lies the ancient city of Nineveh, which was the world's largest city around 700 BC. Mosul has since thrived under different rulers, empowered by its strategic position and fertile lands.
In recent history Mosul is mainly known for being the last stand of the Islamic State (ISIS). The fierce battle which took place during 2017 left large parts of the old city in ruins. While much of the city's heritage is destroyed, Maslawis are slowly rebuilding the city.

## By bus
From Baghdad: shared taxis are available from Allawi North garage in Baghdad. Cost is 25,000 IQD for a seat (likely 5,000 IQD extra for the front seat); the driver will usually cram in 4 passengers before leaving. The journey takes 4-5 hours.
From Erbil: shared taxis are available at 10,000 IQD per seat. Journey takes 2-3 hours.
36.33857143.1369331 Garage Baghdad. Garage where shared taxis to/from Baghdad depart and arrive.    (updated Oct 2022)
36.3508543.172522 Mosul North Garage. Garage for northbound shared taxi departures, i.e. Erbil.    (updated Oct 2022)

## By train
As of 2023 there's no rail service to Mosul, rehabilitation is however ongoing and the government has promised to bring back passenger trains from Baghdad.
36.331443.12223 Mosul railway station (محطة قطار الموصل).     (updated Jun 2023)

## By air
As of 2023, the airport is closed and not expected to reopen within the next few years. The nearest international airport is in Erbil, 75 km east of Mosul.
36.29538943.1480564 Mosul International Airport (OSM  IATA). Closed as of 2021.      (updated Feb 2020)

## Get around
Travelling by car is the safest option for getting around in the city. Several bridges over the river Tigris have now been repaired, making the east-west journey much easier.
There's no public transport system within the city, apart from mini buses and shared taxis. Extensive knowledge of Arabic is needed to use these.

## See
Mosul was rich in old historical places and ancient buildings: mosques, castles, churches, monasteries, synagogues, and schools, many of which have architectural features and decorative work of significance. The town centre was dominated by a maze of streets and attractive 19th-century houses. There were old houses here of beauty. Markets were particularly interesting for the mixture of people who jostle there, such as Arabs, Kurds, Assyrians, Turcoman, Armenians, Yazidi, Mandeans, Roma and Shabaks. Mosul also had a sizable Jewish population.

## Mosques and shrines
Mosul is a treasure trove for those interested in historic Islamic religious architecture with dozens of mosques dating back hundreds of years. However many are in a state of disrepair or damaged by the war. Also some mosques might be off limit to visit for non-Muslims.
36.34298943.1269291 Great Mosque of al-Nuri (جامع النوري). Tradition holds that Nur ad-Din Zangi, a Turkoman atabeg of the Great Seljuk Empire and sultan of its Syrian province, built the mosque in 1172–1173, shortly before his death. the remarkably elaborate brickwork 52-m high minaret that leans like the Tower of Pisa, called Al-Hadba ("the hunchback"). It was destroyed during the last days of the Battle of Mosul in 2017. As of 2020, reconstruction efforts are ongoing.      (updated Feb 2020)
36.34027943.1405912 Mujahidi Mosque. Dates back to 12th century AD, and is distinguished for its shen dome and elaborately wrought mihrab. Large parts of it was destroyed by ISIS in 2015.      (updated Mar 2019)
36.35757943.1417043 Mosul Grand Mosque (جامع الموصل الكبير). A modern mosque still under construction on the right side of Tigris.      (updated Jan 2020)
36.35455243.1227044 Mausoleum of Yahya Abu al-Qasim. On the right bank of the Tigris, known for its conical dome, decorative brickwork and calligraphy engraved in Mosul blue marble, built in the 13th century. Largely destroyed by ISIS in 2014.      (updated Jan 2020)
36.34828143.1598725 Mosque of the Prophet Yunus. A site with a shared Jewish, Christian and Islamic heritage, this is the supposed burial place of Prophet Jonah. Located on a prominent mound just south of the Nineveh, the site formerly housed both the palace of King Esarhaddon (681-669 BCE) and an Assyrian church. However, a mosque was constructed on the site in the 12th century. The mosque was largely destroyed by ISIS in 2014, but parts of it remain.    (updated Feb 2020)
36.339643.12866 Al-Raabiya Mosque. Built in 1766 with an impressive decorated dome. The site was damaged during the war but it being rebuild in 2021.  (updated Jun 2021)

## Churches and monasteries
Mosul had the largest proportion of Assyrian Christians of all the Iraqi cities, and contains several interesting old churches, some of which originally date back to the early centuries of Christianity. Its ancient Assyrian churches are often hidden and their entrances in thick walls are not easy to find. Many churches were partly or completely destroyed by ISIS during their rule and as of 2020 many are in ruins. Also, dotted around Mosul are ancient monasteries, some in ruins while others are still active.
36.33801743.1259947 Shamoun Al-Safa (St. Peter, Mar Petros). Oldest church in Mosul, it dates from the 13th century and named after Shamoun Al-Safa or St. Peter. Early, it had the name of the two Apostles, Peter and Paul, and had early been inhabited by the nuns of the Sacred Hearts.    (updated Nov 2020)
36.34141143.1253548 Church of St. Thomas (Mar Touma). One of the oldest historical churches, named after St. Thomas the Apostle who preached the Gospel in the East, including India.      (updated May 2018)
36.34055643.1272229 Our Lady of the Hour Church (كنيسة اللاتين). Also known as the Latin Church by locals. Built in the 1870s with an impressive clock tower, this large Latin church was partially destroyed by ISIS in 2015. The church has however been faithfully restored to much of its former glory.   (updated Jan 2022)
36.34455643.13263910 Al-Tahera Church. A Syriac Catholic church completed in 1862, it was severely damaged in 2017 but has since then been restored. The church was built on top the Ancient al-Tahera Church, dating back to the 7th century but last reconstructed in 1743. The old church can still be visited, located three metres below ground level   (updated Nov 2020)
36.33858643.12563911 Mart Meskinta Chaldean Church. Chaldean Catholic church dating back to the 12th century, latest major remodeling was in 1851.   (updated Jan 2024)
Mar Petion Church. Mar Petion, educated by his cousin in a monastery, was martyred in 446 AD. It is the first Chaldean Catholic church in Mosul, after the union of many Assyrians with Rome in the 17th century. It dates back to the 10th century, and lies 3 m below street level. This church suffered destruction, and it has been reconstructed many times. (updated Jan 2020)
Mar Hudeni Church. Named after Mar Ahudemmeh (Hudeni) Maphrian of Tikrit who martyred in 575 AD. Mar Hudeni is an old church of the Tikritans in Mosul. It dates back to the 10th century, lies 7 metres below street and was first reconstructed in 1970. People can get mineral water from the well in its yard. The chain, fixed in the wall, is thought to cure epileptics. (updated Jan 2020)
36.409743.119712 St. George's Monastery (Mar Gurguis). One of the oldest churches in Mosul, named after St. George, was probably built late in the 17th century. Pilgrims from different parts of the North visit it yearly in the spring, when many people also go out to its whereabouts on holiday. It is about 6 metres below street. A modern church was built over the old one in 1931, abolishing much of its archeological significance. The only monuments left are a marble door-frame decorated with a carved Estrangelo (Syriac) inscription, and two niches, which date back to the 13th or 14th century.   (updated Jan 2022)
36.340143.126413 Anglican Church. One of very few Anglican churches in Iraq. Badly damaged during the war but has since been rebuilt. Parts of the intricate ornaments remains.    (updated Jan 2024)
36.4943.44277814 Mar Mattai Monastery. Famous monastery is situated about 20 km east of Mosul on the top of a high mountain (Mount Maqloub). It was built by Mar Matte, a monk who fled with several other monks in 362 AD from the Monastery of Zuknin near the City of Amid (Diyarbakir) in the southern part of Asia Minor (modern Turkey) and the north of Iraq during the reign of Emperor Julian the Apostate (361–363 AD). It has a precious library containing Syrianic scriptures.   (updated Jan 2020)
36.13777843.40638915 Monastery of Mar Behnam. Also called Deir Al-Jubb (the Cistern Monastery) and built in the 12th or 13th century, it lies in the Nineveh Plain near Nimrud about 32 kilometres southwest of Mosul. The monastery, a great fort-like building, rises next to the tomb of Mar Behnam, a prince who was killed by the Sassanians, perhaps during the 4th century AD.   (updated Jan 2020)
36.29258643.13108516 Monastery of Saint Elijah (Dair Mar Elia). Ruins of the oldest Christian Monastery in Iraq, it dates from the 6th century. Severely damaged by ISIS in 2014.      (updated Jan 2020)

## Other sites
36.3378543.13958617 Mosul Museum. Used to contain many interesting finds from the ancient sites of the old Assyrian capital cities Nineveh and Nimrud. Some of the collection was spared destruction and the museum reopened in late 2020.      (updated May 2018)
36.35531443.1215918 Bash Tapia Castle. Mosul's old walls have disappeared, these imposing ruins rose high over the Tigris until they were largely destroyed by ISIS in 2016.      (updated Nov 2018)
36.352843.125719 Qara Serai (Black Palace). Remnants of the 13th century palace of Sultan Badruddin Lu'lu'.   (updated Jan 2020)
36.349343.117420 Barood Khana. Built in 1843 as the headquarters of the Ottoman military.  (updated Jun 2021)
36.341643.130821 Beit al-Tutunji (قصر مصطفى اغا التوتنجي). An early nineteenth-century historic house in that represents a fine example of Ottoman vernacular architecture, the house was badly damaged during the ISIS occupation but is being rehabilitated as of late 2021. It is expected to reopen as a museum and cultural center.      (updated Nov 2021)
36.340943.111522 Mosul War Cemetery. British war cemetery, with victims from both World Wars buried here.    (updated Jan 2024)

## Nineveh
Just across the river and ever closer to expanding Mosul were the great ruins of Nineveh, an ancient Assyrian city and the capital of the Neo-Assyrian Empire. Once the largest city in the world and covering an area of some 750 ha, it was besieged, destroyed and left unpopulated after the 612 BC battle of Nineveh. There have been repeated archaeological projects and some half-finished attempts at reconstructions, but unfortunately the site suffers from rapid decay due to lack of protection from the elements, vandalism and looting. Large parts of the site, including its walls, was sacked by ISIS in 2016.
36.358243.152423 Kuyunjik Mound. Ruin mound that rises about 20 metres above the surrounding plain of the ancient city. Today, there is little evidence of these old excavations other than weathered pits and earth piles.    (updated Jul 2021)
Nebi Yunus. Second ruin mound at Nineveh (updated Jan 2020)
The ruins of Nineveh were surrounded by the remains of a massive stone and mudbrick wall dating from about 700 BC.
36.36145243.1465524 Mashki Gate (ماشکی دروازه). Also known as Gate of the Water Carriers, this gate was perhaps used to take livestock to water from the River Tigris which now flows about 1.5 km to the west. It has been reconstructed in fortified mudbrick to the height of the top of the vaulted passageway.    (updated Jan 2020)
36.371343.147825 Nergal Gate. Named for the god Nergal, it may have been used for some ceremonial purpose, as it is the only known gate flanked by stone sculptures of winged bull-men (lamassu). It was reconstructed in the mid-20th century.     (updated Jan 2020)
36.374743.154526 Adad Gate. Named after the god Adad.    (updated Jan 2020)
36.350843.175527 Shamash Gate. named after the god Shamash, It is the only gate with such a significant projection. The mound of its remains towers above the surrounding terrain. Its size and design suggest it was the most important gate in Neo-Assyrian times. The mudbrick reconstruction in 1960s has deteriorated significantly.    (updated Jan 2020)
36.343243.17728 Halzi Gate.    (updated Jan 2020)

## Do
36.344243.14481 Spring Theater (مسرح الربيع). Partly restored in 2021, this theater and music venue is home to several performances.    (updated Apr 2021)
36.343143.12532 Baytna (مؤسسة بيتنا). Housed in a historic house, this cultural centre houses exhibitions and live concerts.    (updated Jul 2021)
36.374243.12013 Mosul Forest. Established as a nursery to produce seeds in the early 1950s, this urban forest is a popular for picknicks and hiking. The park was severely damaged during the ISIS occupation, but are recovering.    (updated Jan 2023)

## Eat
A number of restaurants, mainly on the eastern side of the city, have reopened.

## Drink
Alcohol is not widely available but in the aftermath of the liberation from Daesh a handful of bars have reopened.

## Sleep
As of early 2020, major hotels chains have yet to reopen in Mosul, but there is a limited number of smaller hotels. The landmark Nineveh International Hotel was completely ruined in 2017.
36.37720543.1150691 Al Habda Tourist Hotel (فندق الحدباء السياحي في الموصل), ☏ +964 770 453 9305. Resort-style hotel along the river Tigris.    (updated May 2018)
36.3602343.1427652 Al Sultan Palace Hotel (فندق قصر السلطان), ☏ +964 770 006 6027. One of few hotels that is open near the city centre.    (updated Jan 2020)
36.3390343.138343 Al Safir Hotel (فندق السفير), ☏ +964 772 900 9299 (WhatsApp). Hotel near the old city. 25K IQD per night as of October 2022. Fairly basic rooms with small bathrooms (squat toilet, no separate shower) but comfortable beds. At least one of the front desk staff speaks English, but some of them don't. Bookable via WhatsApp.    (updated Oct 2022)

## Nimrud
Former 3,000-year-old Assyrian Empire city first excavated in the 1840s as an archaeological site on the eastern bank of the Tigris, 30 km (20 miles) south of Mosul. Overrun by ISIL (Daesh) in 2014, historic sites destroyed in 2015. The Iraqi Army reclaimed Nimrud in 2016.  The site contained the palace of Ashurnasirpal, the king of Assyria. Many of the artefacts are in the British Museum, London, the Metropolitan Museum in New York City or Iraq’s national museum in Baghdad.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
NINEVEH
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:34:31


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 6,140
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nineveh
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nineveh was an ancient Near Eastern city of Upper Mesopotamia, located in the modern-day city of Mosul in northern Iraq. It is located on the eastern bank of the Tigris River and was the capital and largest city of the Neo-Assyrian Empire. Today, it is a common name for the half of Mosul that lies on the eastern bank of the Tigris, and the country's Nineveh Governorate takes its name from it.
It was the largest city in the world for approximately fifty years until the year 612 BC when, after a bitter period of civil war in Assyria, it was sacked by a coalition of its former subject peoples including the Babylonians, Medes, and Scythians. The city was never again a political or administrative centre, but by Late Antiquity it was the seat of an Assyrian Christian bishop of the Assyrian Church of the East. It declined relative to Mosul during the Middle Ages and was mostly abandoned by the 14th century AD after the massacres and dispersal of Assyrian Christians by Timur.
Its ruins lie across the river from the historical city center of Mosul. The two main tells, or mound-ruins, within the walls are Tell Kuyunjiq and Tell Nabī Yūnus, site of a shrine to Jonah. According to the Hebrew Bible and the Quran, Jonah was a prophet who preached to Nineveh. Large numbers of Assyrian sculptures and other artifacts have been excavated from the ruins of Nineveh, and are now located in museums around the world.

The location of Nineveh was known, to some, continuously through the Middle Ages. Benjamin of Tudela visited it in 1170; Petachiah of Regensburg soon after.

Name
The English placename Nineveh comes from the Latin Nīnevē and the Koine Greek Nineuḗ (Νινευή) under influence of the Biblical Hebrew Nīnəweh (נִינְוֶה), from the Akkadian Ninua (var. Ninâ) or Ninuwā. The city was also known as Ninuwa in Mari; Ninawa in Aramaic; Ninwe (ܢܸܢܘܵܐ) in Syriac; and Ninawa (نینوا) in Arabic.

Nabī Yūnus is the Arabic for "Prophet Jonah". Kuyunjiq was, according to Layard, a Turkish name (Layard used the form kouyunjik, diminutive of koyun "sheep" in Turkish); known as Armousheeah by the Arabs, it is thought to have some connection with the Qara Qoyunlu dynasty.

Geography
The remains of ancient Nineveh, the areas of Kuyunjiq and Nabī Yūnus with their mounds, are located on a level part of the plain at the junction of the Tigris and the Khosr Rivers within an area of 750 hectares (1,900 acres) circumscribed by a 12-kilometre (7.5 mi) fortification wall. This whole extensive space is now one immense area of ruins, roughly a third of these overlaid by the Nebi Yunus suburbs of the city of eastern Mosul.
The site of ancient Nineveh is bisected by the Khosr river. North of the Khosr, the site is called Kuyunjiq, including the acropolis of Tell Kuyunjiq; the illegal village of Rahmaniye lay in eastern Kuyunjiq. South of the Khosr, the urbanized area is called Nebi Yunus (also Ghazliya, Jezayr, Jammasa), including Tell Nebi Yunus, where are the mosque of the Prophet Jonah, and a palace of Esarhaddon/Ashurbanipal below it. South of the street Al-'Asady (made by Daesh by destroying swaths of the city walls) the area is called Junub Ninawah or Shara Pepsi.

History
Neolithic
Nineveh itself was founded as early as 6000 BC during the late Neolithic period. Deep sounding at Nineveh uncovered soil layers that have been dated to early in the era of the Hassuna archaeological culture. The development and culture of Nineveh paralleled Tepe Gawra and Tell Arpachiyah a few kilometers to the northeast. Nineveh was a typical farming village in the Halaf Period.

Chalcolithic
Ubaid period
In 5000 BC, Nineveh transitioned from a Halaf village to an Ubaid village. During the Late Chalcolithic period Nineveh was one of the few Ubaid villages in Upper Mesopotamia which became a proto-city. Others include Ugarit, Brak, Hamoukar, Arbela, Alep, and regionally Susa, Eridu, Nippur. During the period between 4500 and 4000 BC it grew to 40 hectares in size.
The greater Nineveh area is notable in the diffusion of metal technology across the near east as the first location outside of Anatolia to smelt copper. Tell Arpachiyah has the oldest copper smelting remains, and Tepe Gawra has the oldest metal work. The copper came from the mines at Ergani.

Uruk period
Nineveh IV became a trade colony of Uruk during the Uruk Expansion because of its location as the highest navigable point on the Tigris. It was contemporary with, and had a similar function to, Habuba Kabira on the Euphrates. Finds included beveled rim bowls.

Early Bronze Age
Ninevite 5 period
The regional influence of Nineveh became particularly pronounced during the archaeological period known as Ninevite 5, or Ninevite V (3000/2900–2600/2500 BC). This period is defined primarily by the characteristic pottery that is found widely throughout Upper Mesopotamia. Also, for the Upper Mesopotamian region, the Early Jezirah chronology has been developed by archaeologists. According to this regional chronology, 'Ninevite 5' is equivalent to the Early Jezirah I–II period.

Ninevite 5 was preceded by the Late Uruk period. Ninevite 5 pottery is roughly contemporary to the Early Transcaucasian culture ware, and the Jemdet Nasr period ware. Iraqi Scarlet Ware culture also belongs to this period; this colourful painted pottery is somewhat similar to Jemdet Nasr ware. Scarlet Ware was first documented in the Diyala River basin in Iraq. Later, it was also found in the nearby Hamrin Basin, and in Luristan. It is also contemporary with the Proto-Elamite period in Susa.
Ninevite 5 can be subdivided into the Early Ninevite 5 (3000-2750 BC) characterized by painted pottery and Late Ninevite 5 (2750-2500 BC) with incised pottery. In southern Mesopotamia, the former is contemporary with ED I-II, while the latter mirrors ED II-IIIA.

Akkadian period
In the late 3rd millennium BC Nineveh was part of the Akkadian Empire. While the site was occupied in that period, there was minimal official Akkadian presence there—unlike at Assur which had a much more notable presence. An Akkadian period bronze statue head found at Nineveh was later determined to be a 7th century addition.

Middle Bronze
In the early 2nd millennium BC Nineveh became part of the Kingdom of Upper Mesopotamia during the reign of Shamshi-Adad I (c. 1809–1775 BC), Amorite ruler of Ekallatum. It became a center of worship of Ishtar.

Late Bronze
Mitanni period
The goddess's statue was sent to Pharaoh Amenhotep III of Egypt in the 14th century BC, by orders of the king Tushratta of Mitanni. Nineveh became one of Mitanni's vassals for half a century until the early 14th century BC.

Middle Assyrian period
The Assyrian king Ashur-uballit I reclaimed it in 1365 BC while overthrowing the Mitanni Empire and creating the Middle Assyrian Empire (1365–1050 BC).
There is a large body of evidence to show that Assyrian monarchs built extensively in Nineveh during the late 3rd and 2nd millennia BC; it appears to have been originally an "Assyrian provincial town". Later monarchs whose inscriptions have appeared on the high city include the Middle Assyrian Empire kings Shalmaneser I (1274–1245 BC) and Tiglath-Pileser I (1114–1076 BC), both of whom were active builders in Assur (Ashur).

Iron Age
Neo-Assyrian period
During the Neo-Assyrian Empire, particularly from the time of Ashurnasirpal II (ruled 883–859 BC) onward, there was considerable architectural expansion. Successive monarchs such as Tiglath-pileser III, Sargon II, Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and Ashurbanipal maintained and founded new palaces, as well as temples to Sîn, Ashur, Nergal, Shamash, Ninurta, Ishtar, Tammuz, Nisroch and Nabu.
The Hebrew Book of Jonah, which was most likely written between 793 and 758 BC, is an account of the city's repentance and Jehovah's mercy which prevented destruction.

Sennacherib's development of Nineveh
It was Sennacherib who made Nineveh a truly influential city (c. 700 BC), as he laid out new streets and squares, and built within it the South West Palace, or "palace without a rival", the plan of which has been mostly recovered and has overall dimensions of about 503 by 242 metres (1,650 ft × 794 ft). It had at least 80 rooms, many of which were lined with sculpture. A large number of cuneiform tablets were found in the palace. The solid foundation was made out of limestone blocks and mud bricks; it was 22 metres (72 ft) tall. In total, the foundation is made of roughly 2,680,000 cubic metres (3,505,308 cu yd) of brick (approximately 160 million bricks). The walls on top, made out of mud brick, were an additional 20 metres (66 ft) tall.
Some of the principal doorways were flanked by colossal stone lamassu door figures weighing up to 30,000 kilograms (30 t); these were winged Mesopotamian lions or bulls, with human heads. These were transported 50 kilometres (31 mi) from quarries at Balatai, and they had to be lifted up 20 metres (66 ft) once they arrived at the site, presumably by a ramp. There are also 3,000 metres (9,843 ft) of stone Assyrian palace reliefs, that include pictorial records documenting every construction step including carving the statues and transporting them on a barge. One picture shows 44 men towing a colossal statue. The carving shows three men directing the operation while standing on the Colossus. Once the statues arrived at their destination, the final carving was done. Most of the statues weigh between 9,000 and 27,000 kilograms (19,842 and 59,525 lb).
The stone carvings in the walls include many battle scenes, impalings and scenes showing Sennacherib's men parading the spoils of war before him. The inscriptions boasted of his conquests: he wrote of Babylon: "Its inhabitants, young and old, I did not spare, and with their corpses I filled the streets of the city." A full and characteristic set shows the campaign leading up to the siege of Lachish in 701 BC; it is the "finest" from the reign of Sennacherib, and now in the British Museum. He later wrote about a battle in Lachish: "And Hezekiah of Judah who had not submitted to my yoke ... him I shut up in Jerusalem his royal city like a caged bird. Earthworks I threw up against him, and anyone coming out of his city gate I made pay for his crime. His cities which I had plundered I had cut off from his land."
At this time, Nineveh comprised about 7 square kilometres (1,730 acres) of land, and fifteen great gates penetrated its walls. An elaborate system of eighteen canals brought water from the hills to Nineveh, and several sections of a magnificently constructed aqueduct erected by Sennacherib were discovered at Jerwan, about 65 kilometres (40 mi) distant. The enclosed area had more than 100,000 inhabitants (maybe closer to 150,000), about twice as many as Babylon at the time, placing it among the largest settlements worldwide.
Some scholars such as Stephanie Dalley at Oxford believe that the garden Sennacherib built next to his palace, with its associated irrigation works, was the original Hanging Gardens of Babylon; Dalley's argument is based on a disputation of the traditional placement of the Hanging Gardens attributed to Berossus, together with a combination of literary and archaeological evidence.

After Ashurbanipal
The greatness of Nineveh was short-lived. In around 627 BC, after the death of its last great king Ashurbanipal, the Neo-Assyrian Empire began to unravel through a series of bitter civil wars between rival claimants for the throne, and in 616 BC Assyria was attacked by its own former vassals, the Chaldeans, Babylonians, Medes, and Scythians. In about 616 BC Kalhu was sacked, the allied forces eventually reached Nineveh, besieging and sacking the city in 612 BC, following bitter house-to-house fighting, after which it was razed. Most of the people in the city who could not escape to the last Assyrian strongholds in the north and west were either massacred or deported out of the city and into the countryside where they founded new settlements. Many unburied skeletons were found by the archaeologists at the site. The Assyrian Empire then came to an end by 605 BC, the Medes and Babylonians dividing its colonies between themselves.
It is not clear whether Nineveh came under the rule of the Medes or the Neo-Babylonian Empire in 612. The Babylonian Chronicles concerning the Fall of Nineveh record that Nineveh was "turned into mounds and heaps", but this is literary hyperbole. The complete destruction of Nineveh has traditionally been seen as confirmed by the Hebrew Book of Ezekiel and the Greek Retreat of the Ten Thousand of Xenophon (d. 354 BC). There are no later cuneiform tablets in Akkadian from Nineveh. Although devastated in 612 BC, the city was not completely abandoned. Yet, to the Greek historians Ctesias and Herodotus (c. 400 BC), Nineveh was a thing of the past; and when Xenophon passed the place in the 4th century BC he described it as abandoned.

Persian period
The earliest piece of written evidence for the persistence of Nineveh as a settlement is possibly the Cyrus Cylinder of 539/538 BC, but the reading of this is disputed. If correctly read as Nineveh, it indicates that Cyrus the Great restored the temple of Ishtar at Nineveh and probably encouraged resettlement. A number of cuneiform Elamite tablets have been found at Nineveh. They probably date from the time of the revival of Elam in the century following the collapse of Assyria.
Archaeologically, there is evidence of repairs at the temple of Nabu after 612 BC and for the continued use of Sennacherib's palace. There is evidence of syncretic Hellenistic cults. A statue of Hermes has been found and a Greek inscription attached to a shrine of the Sebitti. A statue of Herakles Epitrapezios dated to the 2nd century AD has also been found.

Classical period
The city was actively resettled under the Seleucid Empire. There is evidence of more changes in Sennacherib's palace under the Parthian Empire. The Parthians also established a municipal mint at Nineveh coining in bronze. According to Tacitus, in AD 50 Meherdates, a claimant to the Parthian throne with Roman support, took Nineveh.

Late Antiquity
By Late Antiquity, Nineveh was restricted to the east bank of the Tigris and the west bank was uninhabited. Under the Sasanian Empire, Nineveh was not an administrative centre. By the 2nd century AD there were Christians present and by 554 it was a bishopric of the Church of the East. King Khosrow II (591–628) built a fortress on the west bank, and two Christian monasteries were constructed around 570 and 595. This growing settlement was not called Mosul until after the Arab conquests. It may have been called Hesnā ʿEbrāyē (Jews' Fort).
In 627, the city was the site of the Battle of Nineveh between the Eastern Roman Empire and the Sasanians. In 641, it was conquered by the Arabs, who built a mosque on the west bank and turned it into an administrative centre. Under the Umayyad dynasty, Mosul eclipsed Nineveh, which was reduced to a Christian suburb with limited new construction. By the 13th century, Nineveh was mostly ruins and was subsequently absorbed into Mosul. A church was converted into a Muslim shrine to the prophet Jonah, which continued to attract pilgrims until its destruction by ISIL in 2014. In late Ottoman times, the ashlar masonry of the North Palace of Ashurbanipal was quarried to make for the pilons of the Old Bridge over the Tigris. The modern city of Mosul is occasionally referred to as Nineveh, such as during the operation to retake Mosul in 2016–17.

Biblical Nineveh
In the Hebrew Bible, Nineveh is first mentioned in Genesis 10:11: "Ashur left that land, and built Nineveh". Some modern English translations interpret "Ashur" in the Hebrew of this verse as the country "Assyria" rather than a person, thus making Nimrod, rather than Ashur, the founder of Nineveh. The discovery of the fifteen Jubilees texts found amongst the Dead Sea Scrolls has since shown that, according to the Jewish sects of Qumran, Genesis 10:11 affirms the apportionment of Nineveh to Ashur.

According to Isaiah 37:37–38 Nineveh was also the place where Sennacherib died at the hands of his two sons, who then fled to Ararat. The book of the minor prophet Nahum is almost exclusively taken up with prophetic denunciations against Nineveh. Its ruin and utter desolation are foretold in Nahum 1:14 and Nahum 3:19. In Nahum 2:6–11 its end was fortold to be strange, sudden, and tragic. According to Isaiah 10:5–19 it was God's doing, his judgment on Assyria's pride. In fulfillment of prophecy, God made "an utter end of the place". It became a "desolation". In Zephaniah 2:13–15 the minor prophet Zephaniah also predicts its destruction along with the fall of the empire of which it was the capital. Nineveh is also the setting of the Book of Tobit.
The Book of Jonah (Jonah 3:3 and Jonah 4:11), set in the days of the Assyrian Empire, describes it as an "exceedingly great city of three days' journey in breadth", whose population at that time is given as "more than 120,000". Genesis 10:11–12 lists four cities "Nineveh, Rehoboth, Calah, and Resen", ambiguously stating that either Resen or Calah is "the great city". The ruins of Kuyunjiq, Nimrud, Karamlesh and Khorsabad form the four corners of an irregular quadrilateral. The ruins of the "great city" Nineveh, with the whole area included within the parallelogram they form by lines drawn from the one to the other, are generally regarded as consisting of these four sites. The description of Nineveh in Jonah likely was a reference to greater Nineveh, including the surrounding cities of Rehoboth, Calah and Resen The Book of Jonah depicts Nineveh as a wicked city worthy of destruction. God sent Jonah to preach to the Ninevites of their coming destruction, and they fasted and repented because of this. As a result, God spared the city; when Jonah protests against this, God states he is showing mercy for the population who, according to Jonah 4:11), are ignorant of the difference between right and wrong ("who cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand" and mercy for the beasts in the city.
Nineveh's repentance and salvation from evil can be found in the Hebrew Tanakh, also known as the Old Testament, and referred to in Matthew 12:41 and Luke 11:32 and Muslim Quran. To this day, Syriac and Oriental Orthodox churches commemorate the three days Jonah spent inside the fish during the Fast of Nineveh. Some Christians observe this holiday fast by refraining from food and drink, with churches encouraging followers to refrain from dairy products, fish and other meats.

Archaeology
Carsten Niebuhr recorded its location during the 1761–1767 Danish expedition. Niebuhr wrote afterwards that "I did not learn that I was at so remarkable a spot, till near the river. Then they showed me a village on a great hill, which they call Nunia, and a mosque, in which the prophet Jonah was buried. Another hill in this district is called Kalla Nunia, or the Castle of Nineveh. On that lies a village Koindsjug." In 1820 the site was explored and described by archaeologist Claudius Rich. In 1842, the French Consul General at Mosul, Paul-Émile Botta, began to search the vast mounds that lay along the opposite bank of the river. While at Tell Kuyunjiq he had little success, the locals whom he employed in these excavations, to their great surprise, came upon the ruins of a building at the 20 km far-away mound of Khorsabad, which, on further exploration, turned out to be the royal palace of Sargon II, in which large numbers of reliefs were found and recorded, though they had been damaged by fire and were mostly too fragile to remove.

In 1847 the young British diplomat Austen Henry Layard explored the ruins. Layard did not use modern archaeological methods; his stated goal was "to obtain the largest possible number of well preserved objects of art at the least possible outlay of time and money". In the Kuyunjiq mound, Layard rediscovered in 1849 the lost palace of Sennacherib with its 71 rooms and colossal bas-reliefs. He also unearthed the palace and famous library of Ashurbanipal with 22,000 cuneiform clay tablets. Most of Layard's material was sent to the British Museum, but some was dispersed elsewhere: two large pieces were given to Lady Charlotte Guest and these eventually found their way to the Metropolitan Museum.
The work of exploration was carried on by Hormuzd Rassam, George Smith and others, and a vast treasury of specimens of Assyria was incrementally exhumed for European museums. Palace after palace was discovered, with their decorations and their sculptured slabs, revealing the life and manners of this ancient people, their arts of war and peace, the forms of their religion, the style of their architecture, and the magnificence of their monarchs.
The mound of Tell Kuyunjiq was excavated again by the archaeologists of the British Museum, led by Leonard William King, between 1902 and 1904. Their efforts concentrated on the site of the Temple of Nabu where another cuneiform library was supposed to exist. However, no such library was ever found: most likely, it had been destroyed by the activities of later residents.
The excavations started again in 1927, under the direction of Campbell Thompson, who had taken part in King's expeditions. Some works were carried out outside Kuyunjiq, for instance on the mound of Tell Nebi Yunus, which was the ancient arsenal of Nineveh, or along the outside walls. Here, near the northwestern corner of the walls, beyond the pavement of a later building, the archaeologists found almost 300 fragments of prisms recording the royal annals of Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, and Ashurbanipal, beside a prism of Esarhaddon which was almost perfect.
After the Second World War, several excavations were carried out by Iraqi archaeologists. From 1951 to 1958, Mohammed Ali Mustafa worked the site. The work was continued from 1967 through 1971 by Tariq Madhloom. Some additional excavation occurred by Manhal Jabur from the early 1970s to 1987. For the most part, these digs focused on Tell Nebi Yunus.
The British archaeologist and Assyriologist Professor David Stronach of the University of California, Berkeley conducted a series of surveys and digs at the site from 1987 to 1990, focusing his attentions on the several gates and the existent mudbrick walls, as well as the system that supplied water to the city in times of siege. The excavation reports are in progress.
After Mosul’s liberation from the control of the Islamic State (IS), Peter A. Miglus, University of Heidelberg, established a rescue project in 2018, exploring and documenting the intrusive IS tunnels in the Assyrian Military Palace that is located below the destroyed Mosque of the prophet Jonah on Tell Nebi Yunus. Archaeological excavations have been conducted since 2019. Subsequently, an extensive research project, first under the direction of Stefan M. Maul and now of Aaron Schmidt, University of Heidelberg, developed, focusing also on other areas of Nineveh. At Tell Kuyunjiq, activities started in 2021 with rescue and restoration measures for the destroyed reliefs in the throne room wing of the Southwest Palace. Excavations in the North Palace commenced in 2022. Since 2023, work has also been conducted at the Nergal Gate, which was bulldozed by IS. In the lower town, geophysical surveys were carried out north of Kuyunjiq in 2021 and 2023 in preparation of future research on residential areas.
An Iraqi–Italian Archaeological Expedition by the Alma Mater Studiorum – University of Bologna and the Iraqi State Board of Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH), led by Nicolò Marchetti, began (with five campaigns having taken place between 2019 and 2023) a project aiming at the excavation, conservation and public presentation of the lower town of Nineveh. Work was carried out in nineteen excavation areas, from the Adad Gate – now completely repaired (after removing hundreds of tons of debris from ISIL's 2016 destructions), explored and protected with a new roof – deep into the Nebi Yunus town. In a few areas a thick later stratigraphy was encountered, but the late 7th century BC stratum was reached everywhere (actually in two areas in the pre-Sennacherib lower town the excavations already exposed older strata, up to the 11th century BC until now, aiming in the future at exploring the first settlement therein). In October 2023 an archaeological park was inaugurated at the site.
Since 2024, an expedition led by Tim Harrison of the ISAC at the University of Chicago has taken over from the University of Bologna the investigation of the eastern lower town at Nineveh.

Archaeological remains
The site is marked by two large mounds, Tell Kuyunjiq and Tell Nabī Yūnus "Prophet Jonah", and the remains of the city walls (about 12 kilometres (7 mi) in circumference), enclosing a vast lower town extensively encroached by modern buildings. The Neo-Assyrian levels of Kuyunjiq have been extensively explored. The other mound, Nabī Yūnus, has not been as extensively explored because there was an Arab Muslim shrine dedicated to that prophet on the site. On July 24, 2014, the Islamic State destroyed the shrine as part of a campaign to destroy religious sanctuaries it deemed "un-Islamic", but also to loot that site through tunneling.
The ruin mound of Tell Kuyunjiq rises about 20 metres (66 ft) above the surrounding plain of the ancient city. It is quite broad, measuring about 800 by 500 metres (2,625 ft × 1,640 ft). Its upper layers have been extensively excavated, and several Neo-Assyrian palaces and temples have been found there. A deep sounding by Max Mallowan revealed evidence of habitation as early as the 6th millennium BC. Today, there is little evidence of these old excavations other than weathered pits and earth piles. In 1990, the only Assyrian remains visible were those of the entry court and the first few chambers of the Palace of Sennacherib. Since that time, the palace chambers have received significant damage by looters and by the removal of the protective roof. Portions of relief sculptures that were in the palace chambers in 1990 were seen on the antiquities market by 1996. Photographs of the chambers made in 2003 show that many of the fine relief sculptures there have been reduced to piles of rubble and a conservation effort ensued. In 2016 Sennacherib's throne room was bulldozed by Daesh and the sculpted fragments were left exposed until 2022.

Tell Nebi Yunus is located about 1 kilometre (0.6 mi) south of Kuyunjiq and is the secondary ruin mound at Nineveh. On the basis of texts of Sennacherib, the site has traditionally been identified as the "armory" of Nineveh, and a gate and pavements excavated by Iraqis in 1954 have been considered to be part of the "armory" complex. Excavations in 1990 revealed a monumental entryway consisting of a number of large inscribed orthostats and "bull-man" sculptures, some apparently unfinished. Following the liberation of Mosul, the tunnels under Tell Nebi Yunus were explored in 2018, in which a 3000-year-old palace was discovered, including a pair of reliefs, each showing a row of women, along with reliefs of lamassu.

The ruins of Nineveh are surrounded by the remains of a massive stone and mudbrick wall dating from about 700 BC. About 12 km in length, the wall system consisted of an ashlar stone retaining wall about 6 metres (20 ft) high surmounted by a mudbrick wall about 10 metres (33 ft) high and 15 metres (49 ft) thick. The stone retaining wall had projecting stone towers spaced about every 18 metres (59 ft). The stone wall and towers were topped by three-step merlons.
Six of the gateways have been explored to some extent by archaeologists (besides the possible Sin Gate at the north-west end of the site):

Mashki Gate Masqi Gate (Arabic: بوابة مسقي Derived from the passive participle of سَقَى saqā, "to give (sb) a drink, to water, to irrigate") was perhaps used to take livestock to water from the Tigris which currently flows about 1.5 kilometres (0.9 mi) to the west. It has been reconstructed in fortified mudbrick to the height of the top of the vaulted passageway. The Assyrian original may have been plastered and ornamented. It was bulldozed along with the Nergal and Adad Gates during IS occupation. During the restoration project, seven damaged alabaster carvings from the time of Sennacherib were found at the gate in 2022.
Nergal Gate: Named for the god Nergal, it may have been used for some ceremonial purpose, as it is the only known gate flanked by stone sculptures of winged bull-men (lamassu). The reconstruction is conjectural, as the gate was excavated by Layard in the mid-19th century and reconstructed in the mid-20th century. The lamassu on this gate were defaced with a jackhammer by IS forces and the gate was utterly destroyed.
Adad Gate: Named for the god Adad. A roofing above it was begun in the late 1960s by Iraqis but was not completed. The result was a mixture of concrete and eroding mudbrick, which nonetheless does give some idea of the original structure. The excavator left some features unexcavated, allowing a view of the original Assyrian construction. The original brickwork of the outer vaulted passageway was well exposed, as was the entrance of the vaulted stairway to the upper levels. The actions of Nineveh's last defenders could be seen in the hastily built mudbrick construction which narrowed the passageway from 4 to 2 metres (13 to 7 ft). Around April 13, 2016, IS demolished both the gate and the adjacent wall by flattening them with a bulldozer. It has been reexcavated (including a 7 m deep stair-well), conservated and presented to the public by the Iraqi-Italian expedition between 2019 and 2023.
Shamash Gate: Named for the sun god Shamash, it opens to the road to Erbil. It was excavated by Layard in the 19th century. The stone retaining wall and part of the mudbrick structure were reconstructed in the 1960s. The mudbrick reconstruction has deteriorated significantly. The stone wall projects outward about 20 metres (66 ft) from the line of main wall for a width of about 70 metres (230 ft). It is the only gate with such a significant projection. The mound of its remains towers above the surrounding terrain. Its size and design suggest it was the most important gate in Neo-Assyrian times. It is now being excavated by the University of Chicago expedition.
Halzi Gate: Near the south end of the eastern city wall. Exploratory excavations were undertaken here by the University of California, Berkeley expedition of 1989–1990 and again in 2022 and 2023 by the Iraqi-Italian Expedition. There is an outward projection of the city wall, though not as pronounced as at the Shamash Gate. The entry passage had been narrowed with mudbrick to about 2 metres (7 ft) as at the Adad Gate. Human remains from the final battle of Nineveh were found in the passageway. Located in the eastern wall, it is the southernmost and largest of all the remaining gates of ancient Nineveh.
A new gate has been discovered in 2021 to the north of the Shamash Gate and south of the Khosr river (in the area labeled as N by the Iraqi-Italian expedition), next to a spectacular water tunnel running for 42 m under the 31m-thick city wall (area G, excavated in 2020 and 2021).

Threats to the site
The site of Nineveh is exposed to decay of its reliefs by a lack of proper protective roofing, vandalism and looting holes dug into chamber floors. Future preservation is further compromised by the site's proximity to expanding suburbs.
The ailing Mosul Dam is a persistent threat to Nineveh as well as the city of Mosul. This is in no small part due to years of disrepair (in 2006, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers cited it as the most dangerous dam in the world), the cancellation of a second dam project in the 1980s to act as flood relief in case of failure, and occupation by ISIL in 2014 resulting in fleeing workers and stolen equipment. If the dam fails, the entire site could be under as much as 45 feet (14 m) of water.
A major threat to Nineveh has been deliberate human actions by ISIL or Daesh, which occupied the area between 2014 and 2017. In early 2015, they first announced their intention to destroy the walls of Nineveh if the Iraqis tried to liberate the city,  and they also threatened the destruction of archaeological heritage and artifacts. On February 26, 2015, video footage shows IS smashing statues and artifacts at the Mosul Museum. They are believed to have plundered others to sell overseas. The items were mostly from the Assyrian exhibit, which Daesh declared blasphemous and idolatrous. There were 300 items remaining in the museum out of a total of 1,900, with the other 1,600 being taken to the National Museum of Iraq in Baghdad for security reasons prior to the 2014 Fall of Mosul. Some of the artifacts sold and/or destroyed were from Nineveh. Just a few days after the destruction of the museum pieces, Daesh terrorists demolished parts of three other major UNESCO world heritage sites, Khorsabad, Nimrud and Hatra. In 2016, Daesh effectively destroyed the Adad Gate (along with the adjoining northern city walls, now cleared by the Iraqi-Italian expedition thanks to the support of the Kaplan Fund), as well as the Mashki Gate (along with the eastern fortifications. The Mashki Gate is in the process of being restored). Daesh also called for intensive new housing in the Kuyunjiq part and opened a large road across the southern part of the site (currently known as Al Asady Road).
After the cultural destruction and between 2014-2019, international efforts by archeologists began recording, evaluating and monitoring the damage and destruction inflicted on sensitive archaeological contexts in Nineveh, using satellite-based remote sensing. The results found that a few high-profile acts of deliberate vandalism were accompanied by much more extensive damage caused by construction and rubbish dumping extending across substantial parts of the site.
Thanks to the activities of the Iraqi-Italian expedition, an archaeological park has been opened at Kuyunjiq since 2023: tourists enter from the Adad gate, subsequently visiting the small Neo-Assyrian palace where the cuneiform library was discovered in 2021, and may then relax in the VW Foundation-funded KALAM mudbrick information center nearby. The site is still endangered, however, with dumping of debris, illegal settlements and economic activities (such as illegal generators for electricity, pipe companies etc.) as the main threats.

Rogation of the Ninevites (Nineveh's Wish)
Members of the Ancient Church of the East, Chaldean Catholic Church, Syriac Catholic Church, Syriac Orthodox Church, Assyrian Church of the East and Saint Thomas Christians of the Syro-Malabar Church observe a fast called Ba'uta d-Ninwe (ܒܥܘܬܐ ܕܢܝܢܘܐ) which means Nineveh's Prayer. Copts and Ethiopian Orthodox also maintain this fast.

In popular culture
English Romantic poet Edwin Atherstone wrote an epic titled The Fall of Nineveh. The work tells of an uprising against king Sardanapalus by all the nations that were dominated by the Assyrian Empire. He is a great criminal who had one hundred prisoners of war executed. After a long struggle, the town is conquered by Median and Babylonian troops, led by prince Arbaces and priest Belesis. The king then sets his own palace on fire and dies inside together with all his concubines.

Atherstone's friend, artist John Martin, created a painting of the same name inspired by the poem. English poet John Masefield's well-known, fanciful 1903 poem Cargoes mentions Nineveh in its first line. Nineveh is also mentioned in Rudyard Kipling's 1897 poem Recessional and Arthur O'Shaughnessy's 1873 poem Ode.

See also
Cities of the ancient Near East
Destruction of cultural heritage by the Islamic State
Historical urban community sizes
Isaac of Nineveh
List of megalithic sites
Nanshe
Qurnah disaster
Short chronology timeline
Tel Keppe

Notes
References
Further reading
This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Easton, Matthew George (1897). "Nineveh". Easton's Bible Dictionary (New and revised ed.). T. Nelson and Sons.

External links

Joanne Farchakh-Bajjaly photos of Nineveh taken in May 2003 showing damage from looters
John Malcolm Russell, "Stolen stones: the modern sack of Nineveh" in Archaeology; looting of sculptures in the 1990s
[20] Nineveh at the British Museum's website. Includes photographs of items from their collection.
University of California Digital Nineveh Archives A teaching and research tool presenting a comprehensive picture of Nineveh within the history of archaeology in the Near East, including a searchable data repository for meaningful analysis of currently unlinked sets of data from different areas of the site and different episodes in the 160-year history of excavations
CyArk Digital Nineveh Archives, publicly accessible, free depository of the data from the previously linked UC Berkeley Nineveh Archives project, fully linked and georeferenced in a UC Berkeley/CyArk research partnership to develop the archive for open web use. Includes creative commons-licensed media items.
Photos of Nineveh, 1989–1990


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 16,337
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ninive
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ninive (en akkadien Ninu(w)a ; en arabe نينوه, Naynuwa ; en araméen ܢܝܢܘܐ ; en hébreu נינוה, Nīnwē) est une ancienne ville de l'Assyrie, dans le Nord de la Mésopotamie. Elle se situait sur la rive est (gauche) du Tigre, au confluent du Khosr (ou Khoser, Koussour), à un emplacement aujourd'hui localisé dans les faubourgs de la ville moderne de Mossoul, en Irak, dont le centre se trouve de l'autre côté du fleuve. Les deux sites principaux de la cité sont les collines (les « tells ») de Kuyunjik et de Nebī Yūnus.
Ninive est l'une des plus anciennes cités de Mésopotamie. Elle était un important carrefour de routes commerciales traversant le Tigre. Elle occupait une position stratégique sur la grande route entre la mer Méditerranée et le plateau Iranien, ce qui lui a apporté la prospérité, de sorte qu'elle est devenue l'une des plus grandes cités de toute la région. Elle doit sa plus grande expansion urbaine au choix du roi assyrien Sennacherib d'en faire la capitale de son grand empire au début du VIIe siècle av. J.-C. Ninive est alors entourée de remparts de briques sur une longueur de 12 km. L'espace total de la cité couvrait 750 hectares à son apogée. L'ensemble de ce vaste espace est aujourd'hui une superposition de ruines recouvertes à certains endroits par les nouvelles banlieues actuelles de la ville de Mossoul. Depuis 2014 et la prise de contrôle de Mossoul par l'organisation terroriste État islamique, les ruines de Ninive ont fait l'objet d'importantes destructions.
Le site de Kuyunjik occupe une place importante dans la redécouverte du Proche-Orient ancien au milieu du XIXe siècle par les archéologues qui mettent au jour ses palais et leurs bas-reliefs, ainsi que par les milliers de tablettes cunéiformes qui y ont été exhumées dès les premiers chantiers de fouilles et ont permis la naissance de la discipline assyriologique. Ce même tell présente la séquence archéologique la plus longue de la Mésopotamie, depuis les premières traces d'habitations au VIe millénaire av. J.-C. jusqu'aux dernières vers les XIIIe – XIVe siècles apr. J.-C. Les fouilles de Ninive ont donc livré une partie substantielle des sources des connaissances actuelles sur l'Empire assyrien et, plus largement, sur la culture de la Mésopotamie antique.

Situation et site
Sur le confluent du grand fleuve le Tigre (assyrien Idiglat), et du Khosr (Huṣur), Ninive est située au sud de l'actuel Kurdistan, dans une vallée fertile où l'agriculture sèche est possible, ainsi que l'élevage. Sa situation est suffisamment en retrait des montagnes pour la protéger des incursions de peuples montagnards, tout en la plaçant à proximité de deux routes commerciales importantes dès les temps les plus anciens : une première qui suit sur un axe nord-sud le cours du Tigre et relie le Taurus et la plaine mésopotamienne, et une seconde de direction est-ouest qui traverse le Tigre à proximité de Ninive et poursuit sa route vers l'ouest en direction du cours moyen de l'Euphrate, puis vers la Mer Méditerranée.
Le site de Ninive, qui couvrait plus de 750 hectares entourés par une muraille à son apogée au VIIe siècle av. J.-C., est coupé en deux par le Khosr d'est en ouest, alors que le Tigre coule à l'ouest en dehors de l'espace urbain. Le tell le plus important du site, Kuyunjik, se situe au nord du Khosr qu'il surplombe et qui effectue une boucle sur son flanc oriental. L'autre tell, Nebi Yunus, est plus petit, et est situé un peu plus d'un kilomètre au sud. L'extension de la ville aux époques historiques se poursuit en contrebas, dans la ville basse, qui s'étend vers l'est des deux tells.

Redécouverte et fouilles
Premiers chantiers à Kuyunjik au milieu du XIXe siècle
Le site du tell de Kuyunjik, situé juste en face de la ville actuelle de Mossoul, est depuis longtemps connu pour être l'emplacement probable de l'antique Ninive. C'est pour cette raison que lorsque l'explorateur anglais Claudius James Rich se rendit en Irak à la recherche des anciens sites de la Mésopotamie en 1820, il fit une halte en ce lieu, dont il dressa les plans, découvrant au passage quelques sculptures. C'est le premier Européen à avoir retrouvé les traces de Ninive, sans faire alors de fouilles. Les premières prospections dans Kuyunjik furent peu fructueuses et il fallut du temps avant de confirmer l'identification de ce tell comme étant l'acropole de l'ancienne grande capitale assyrienne. La redécouverte de Ninive fut l'objectif principal des pionniers de l'archéologie du Proche-Orient ancien lorsqu'ils commencèrent à fouiller les sites de l'ancienne Assyrie, en raison de son prestige et de celui des grands rois assyriens dont les noms étaient encore connus par une grande partie de la population de pays comme la Grande-Bretagne ou la France, en raison du poids important de la culture biblique, ce qui explique pourquoi leurs découvertes furent très suivies. Proches de la grande ville de Mossoul et situés dans un lieu nommé « Ninuwa » par la population locale qui gardait le souvenir de l'ancienne capitale assyrienne, les tells de Nebi Yunus (site qu'il s'avéra impossible de fouiller en raison de son caractère sacré) puis de Kuyunjik furent logiquement, en 1842, la première destination du consul français local, Paul-Émile Botta, lorsqu'il tenta de retrouver Ninive. Alors qu'il se trouvait au bon emplacement, ses trouvailles furent maigres et il douta d'être dans le site désiré ; il se déplaça donc de quelques kilomètres plus au nord, à Khorsabad, où les ruines étaient plus apparentes. Il dégagea des monuments dont il pensa quelque temps qu'il s'agissait bien des ruines de Ninive, avant de mettre en évidence le fait qu'il s’agissait de Dur-Sharrukin.
Peu de temps après, en 1847, le britannique A. H. Layard, qui travaillait déjà dans le site de Nimrud, qu'il pensait de son côté être Ninive et qui était en réalité Kalkhu, supervisa les fouilles de Kuyunjik après ses résultats concluants dans son premier site. Après avoir révélé à Londres ses premières découvertes (effectuées surtout à Nimrud), il revint en 1849 à Kuyunjik pour y effectuer des fouilles plus ambitieuses, avec son assistant Hormuzd Rassam. Ils découvrirent le palais de Sennacherib et des centaines de mètres de reliefs sculptés, notamment ceux relatant la prise de Lakish, et une campagne d'Assurbanipal en Élam, ainsi que le premier lot de tablettes cunéiformes de Ninive, comprenant une partie de la « Bibliothèque d'Assurbanipal » et des archives des rois assyriens. Ces trouvailles furent envoyées au British Museum, où elles se trouvent actuellement. Avec ces découvertes, il devint progressivement évident que le site de Kuyunjik correspondait à l'antique Ninive, les autres capitales assyriennes ayant également été identifiées dans ces mêmes années grâce au début du déchiffrement de l'akkadien cunéiforme.

La poursuite des fouilles par les Britanniques
Layard quitta par la suite les chantiers de fouilles de Mésopotamie pour se lancer dans une carrière de diplomate, et Henry Rawlinson pris les commandes des expéditions britanniques dans la région. Ce dernier laissa les Français explorer la partie nord du tell de Kuyunjik, alors que le reste était attribué à Rassam, qui s'accommodait peu de cette situation. Il fouilla en secret la partie nord du tell en décembre 1853 et trouva une partie du palais nord d'Assurbanipal, où furent mis au jour de nouveaux bas-reliefs, notamment les scènes de chasse au lion de ce roi, ses campagnes contre l'Elam et les Arabes, puis la deuxième partie des tablettes de la Bibliothèque d'Assurbanipal et des archives royales. Ces trouvailles furent donc envoyées à Londres au nez et à la barbe des archéologues français, qui en gardèrent une profonde rancœur contre Rassam. En 1854, le chantier britannique fut fermé faute de crédits. William Kenneth Loftus reprit ensuite les fouilles du palais d'Assurbanipal d'où les Français avaient été évincés à la suite des découvertes de Rassam et trouva d'autres bas-reliefs. Ses fouilles sont mal connues car elles ont été publiées plus d'un siècle plus tard. Les bas-reliefs découverts à ce moment, ainsi que d'autres bas-reliefs de Ninive laissés par Rawlinson aux Français ou vendus au musée de Berlin furent perdus lors d'un naufrage sur le Chatt-el-Arab en mai 1855, accident qui survint à la suite d'une attaque d'un convoi fluvial dirigé par les Français qui y transportaient aussi une grande partie de sculptures provenant de Khorsabad (naufrage de Gournah).
D'autres campagnes de fouilles furent entreprises par des Britanniques après cet événement dramatique. Le philologue George Smith alors en poste de 1873 à 1874, avait traduit en 1872 à partir des premières tablettes ramenées de Ninive un récit relatant une partie du mythe du Déluge issu de l’Épopée de Gilgamesh et qui eut un grand retentissement en démontrant que la Bible s'était inspirée d'un texte plus ancien. Smith fut financé par le Daily Telegraph pour retrouver une partie manquante du récit du Déluge, entreprise rapidement couronnée de succès. Il fut emporté peu après par une maladie contractée dans le Nord de l'Irak. Hormuzd Rassam fouilla à nouveau le site de 1878 à 1882. E. A. Wallis Budge dirigea également des campagnes après 1885. À Londres, au British Museum qui dirigeait désormais seul les fouilles du site, les savants s'attelaient alors à traduire les tablettes exhumées et qui permettraient de redécouvrir la culture de la Mésopotamie ancienne et une partie de son histoire. Rawlinson confia à Carl Bezold, assyriologue allemand, le soin d'organiser le classement des tablettes de Ninive. Ce dernier publia de 1889 à 1899 un catalogue en cinq volumes de près de 15 000 tablettes ou fragments, qui a depuis fait l'objet de suppléments à la suite d'autres trouvailles de tablettes dans le site, ou après la redécouverte d'autres qui avaient été oubliées dans des caisses du British Museum après les premières fouilles.
Les fouilles reprennent à Kuyunjik de 1903 à 1905, sous la direction de L. W. King puis de R. Campbell-Thompson. Ils découvrent plus de 850 tablettes, dernier lot important de textes provenant de Ninive à être mis au jour, et s'intéressent aux restes architecturaux, notamment à ceux du temple de Nabû.
Après vingt-deux années d'interruption de fouilles, Campbell-Thompson revient à Kuyunjik de 1927 à 1932 pour mener les dernières fouilles britanniques sur place. Les campagnes portèrent à nouveau sur le temple de Nabû, ainsi que sur celui d'Ishtar, mais également sur d'autres constructions isolées. Elles s'intéressaient aux périodes anciennes du tell, précédant la période assyrienne, déjà pressenties lors des campagnes de King. Max Mallowan fut chargé de réaliser un sondage pour établir une stratigraphie précise du tell et dégagea un espace de 20 mètres sur 16, allant jusqu'à 27,5 mètres de profondeur, ce qui ne correspond pas à la plus ancienne occupation du site seulement à la limite à partir de laquelle il devenait dangereux de creuser. Les trouvailles de céramique de ce sondage ainsi que celles effectuées dans d'autres parties du tell permirent de montrer que le site était occupé depuis des périodes très reculées, puisque 22 mètres de couches étaient occupés par les périodes protohistoriques. La chronologie a été précisée par la suite après des découvertes effectuées sur d'autres sites. Les plus anciens objets trouvés par le sondage remontent à la période de Hassuna (v. 5000 av. J.-C.), niveau 1 de la stratigraphie de ce sondage. Mallowan découvrit également des objets des périodes de Gawra et d'Uruk, ainsi que ceux inconnus auparavant d'une culture attestée par le niveau 5 du sondage, et qui prit le nom de « Ninivite V ».

Les fouilles récentes et les menaces pesant sur le site
À partir des années 1950, ce fut le département irakien des Antiquités qui entreprit des fouilles sur Kuyunjik. Les premiers chantiers eurent lieu sous la direction de M. A. Mustafa de 1951 à 1958, qui explora notamment Nebi Yunus. D'autres campagnes furent effectuées dans les décennies suivantes par d'autres archéologues irakiens : en 1967-71, Tariq Madhloom ; en 1980, Manhal Jabur ; en 1987, Abd as-Sattar. Les fouilles de cette période se déplacèrent notamment vers la ville basse, où furent mis au jour plusieurs bâtiments, comme un temple d'époque parthe. Elles explorèrent les murailles et les portes de la ville. Des campagnes de restauration de certaines d'entre elles furent ensuite entreprises.
L'Université de Californie de Berkeley finança les dernières campagnes de fouilles régulières dans le site de 1987 à 1990, dirigées par David Stronach. Elles s'attachèrent notamment à dégager la porte de Halzi et à réaliser une prospection de la partie nord de la ville basse. Le début de la guerre du Golfe interrompit les fouilles.
Actuellement, l'ancien site de Ninive donne son nom à la région administrative de Mossoul (Ninawa). La croissance de la métropole voisine se fait de plus en plus dans la ville basse. Les deux tells sont un peu mieux préservés face à l'urbanisation. Kuyunjik a fait face à divers dommages, dus notamment au manque d'entretien consécutif aux conflits qui agitent la région, concernant avant tout le palais sud-ouest. Certaines œuvres d'art restées sur place (surtout dans la salle du trône) ont été pillées.
À la suite de la prise de contrôle de la région par les djihadistes de l'État islamique, d'autres menaces pèsent sur les artefacts archéologiques encore présents dans le site de Ninive. C'est ainsi que, le 24 juillet 2014, deux mosquées, dont la mosquée abritant la tombe attribuée à Jonas, ont été détruites à l'explosif. En janvier 2015, plusieurs médias arabes confirment la destruction des murs d'enceinte antiques par le groupe fondamentaliste terroriste. En février 2015, le même groupe détruit à coup de masses et d'outils de chantier électriques un grand nombre de statues et d'œuvres d'art assyriennes dans le musée de la ville. Cette destruction de lieux prestigieux, mise en scène pour les médias, a été dénoncée par l'UNESCO comme étant un « crime de guerre », et s'accompagne d'un commerce illicite des œuvres d'art provenant des sites détruits.
Après la fin du contrôle de l’État islamique et la pacification progressive de la région, les archéologues retournent dans le site depuis 2021. Ils comprennent des équipes irakiennes, italiennes, allemandes et américaines qui s'occupent de divers secteurs du site.

Histoire
Origines
Grâce aux avantages de sa situation, un village fondé au VIIe millénaire av. J.-C. sur le tell de Kuyunjik, surplombant alors la confluence des deux cours d'eau locaux, se développa vite et gagna en importance. Un sondage réalisé sous la direction de Max Mallowan en 1931 et 1932 étudia le site jusqu'aux débuts de son occupation, sur le tell de Kuyunjik, et a fait depuis l'objet de nouvelles études. L'occupation la plus ancienne attestée, le niveau 1, remonte à la période de Hassuna, autour de 6500-6000 av. J.-C.
Le niveau 2 a livré un matériel caractéristique de la Période de Samarra et de celle de Halaf, jusqu'à la seconde moitié du VIe millénaire av. J.-C. Sous la strate suivante, celle d'Obeid (v. 5500-4500 av. J.-C., niveau 3), qui correspond à la fin du Chalcolithique, la région de Ninive connut ses premières influences sud-mésopotamiennes, identifiées sur le site de Tepe Gawra.

Période d'Uruk
Au IVe millénaire av. J.-C. (niveau 4), le matériel céramique exhumé à Ninive témoigne du fait que l'influence du sud mésopotamien se faisait de plus en plus forte alors que les types locaux nord mésopotamiens dominaient largement auparavant. Ont ainsi été trouvés des beveled-rim bowls, ou écuelles à bords biseautés, représentatives de la civilisation d'Uruk, ainsi que les premières céramiques réalisées au tour. Il est possible que Ninive fût alors un établissement des « Urukéens », caractéristique de la période d'Uruk, comme Habuba Kabira et Tell Brak en Syrie du Nord. Autre caractéristique de la période, le développement des outils administratifs : les archéologues ont retrouvé à Ninive une bulle d'argile imprimée avec un sceau-cylindre, ainsi qu'un fragment de tablette numérale scellée. L'extension de l'habitat approcherait déjà 40 hectares à Kuyunjik, alors que le nombre d'habitats augmente dans la région qui l'entoure. C'est peut-être de cette période qu'il faut dater un bâtiment voûté en briques crues, dégagé à proximité du temple d'Ishtar par Campbell-Thompson, ce qui serait un témoignage architectural unique de cette période.

Ninive V
Les fouilles des années 1930 sur le tell de Kuyunjik ont identifié au cinquième niveau archéologique une période spécifique, qui a été nommée d'après le site et son niveau : la période de Ninive V, ou « Ninivite V » (v. 3000-2500 av. J.-C.), qui succède à la période d'Uruk et est contemporaine du Dynastique archaïque I de Basse Mésopotamie. Elle est caractérisée dans un premier temps par sa céramique réalisée au tour, décorée de motifs généralement géométriques (parfois animaliers) de couleur brun-rouge sombre sur fond clair ; les vases fermés sans anse à pieds coniques sont une de ses formes les plus courantes. Cette période a été par la suite repérée sur plusieurs sites en Haute Mésopotamie. Elle s'avère être déterminante dans le développement urbain des sites de la région, mais est restée mal connue avant des travaux récents qui ont permis d'en savoir plus à son propos.
Sur le site de Ninive même, le niveau V a été surtout repéré par le sondage de Mallowan, puis par des fouilles au sud-est de Kuyunjik. La cité avait alors une extension importante, et couvrait probablement tout le tell. Une découverte d'objets de cette période dans la ville basse au nord du tell a montré que cette partie-là a également connu une occupation durant le Ninivite V, ce qui est apparemment la première phase d'habitat de la ville basse. Les empreintes de sceaux-cylindres de cette période mises au jour à Kuyunjik semblent indiquer que Ninive faisait des échanges à longue distance avec la Diyala et la Susiane, ce qui confirme le rôle de centre commercial important qu'occupe cette ville dès ses débuts.

Fin du IIIe et début du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. : une ville hourrite
Les derniers siècles du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C., en Mésopotamie, marqués par la domination de deux empires successifs : celui d'Akkad du XXIVe au XXIIe siècle av. J.-C., et celui dit de la troisième dynastie d'Ur (Ur III), au XXIe siècle av. J.-C. Tous les deux étendent leur domination en Mésopotamie du Nord, mais rien n'indique qu'ils ont pu contrôler Ninive. Selon les inscriptions laissées plus tard par Samsi-Addu, le roi Manishtushu d'Akkad aurait construit (ou restauré) le temple de la déesse Ishtar de Ninive, mais aucune inscription de la période akkadienne qui aurait été écrite sur le site même de Ninive n'a été clairement identifiée, les inscriptions de cette époque exhumées à Kuyunjik ayant probablement été transportées là plus tard. Il en va de même pour les artefacts de cette période trouvés sur le site, dont la fameuse tête royale en bronze représentant un souverain d'Akkad non identifié, qui est un des chefs-d'œuvre de l'art de cette période.
Quant à l'influence de la dynastie d'Ur III, elle n'est pas assurée non plus : trois textes de cette époque retrouvés en Basse Mésopotamie contiennent des allusions à Ninive. Ces textes sont : une offrande faite à la déesse Shaushga (Ishtar) locale, une visite de Tish-atal (nom hourrite), dit « l'homme de Ninive » (qui peut être assimilé à son roi), et une réception d'ambassadeurs ninivites à Ur. Ces textes indiquent deux choses : premièrement, Ninive est une ville de peuplement à majorité hourrite, ethnie arrivée dans la région vers la fin de la période akkadienne et peu après celle-ci. Deuxièmement, il n'y a aucune preuve de domination d'Ur III sur les princes du petit État de Ninive. On ne sait pas si le Tish-atal mentionné ci-dessus est le même que le Tish-atal qui règne à Urkesh vers la même époque, ce qui en ferait alors un personnage important.
Les trouvailles archéologiques pour les derniers siècles du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. sont maigres et concentrées à Kuyunjik. Il n'y a aucune preuve archéologique de construction d'un temple par un roi d'Akkad. On a néanmoins identifié un fragment de muraille sur en bordure orientale du tell de Kuyunjik, ce qui constitue la plus ancienne attestation d'une fortification à Ninive. L'habitat s'étend alors probablement sur tout le tell, mais rien n'indique qu'il y a encore une occupation dans la ville basse.
Au début du XVIIIe siècle av. J.-C., les textes de Mari montrent que Ninive (alors appelée Ninet), se trouve bien dans un pays peuplé en majorité de Hourrites et qu'elle fait partie du royaume de la ville, non localisée, de Nurrugûm qui s'étend le long du Tigre, dont elle est le principal centre religieux. Le royaume finit par être l'objet des ambitions du roi Samsi-Addu d'Ekallatum, qui constitue un Royaume de Haute-Mésopotamie et étend ses ambitions vers la région du haut Tigre. Il réussit à s'emparer de Nurrugûm vers 1780, et réside un temps à Ninive même, sans doute pour des motifs religieux. Samsi-Addu entreprend rapidement des travaux dans la ville et restaure le temple principal de la ville, celui de la déesse Ishtar (nommée Shaushga en hourrite), ce qu'apprend une inscription de fondation déjà évoquée, dans laquelle il se présente comme le successeur de l'œuvre du roi Manishtushu d'Akkad. De cette période datent quelques autres inscriptions royales et des tablettes cunéiformes, des lettres et des textes littéraires, dont des possibles fragments de l'Épopée de Gilgamesh. Peu après l'effondrement du royaume de Samsi-Addu, c'est Hammurabi de Babylone qui étend apparemment son autorité sur Ninive : Ishtar de Ninive et son temple (appelé É.MÈŠ.MÈŠ) sont mentionnés dans le prologue du Code de Hammurabi, aux côtés des autres grandes villes du royaume. 
La domination babylonienne ne dépasse pas la fin du XVIIIe siècle av. J.-C. et la suite de l'histoire de Ninive dans la première moitié du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. est mal connue. D'après un texte bilingue écrit en hourrite et en hittite retrouvé à Boğazkale, l'ancienne capitale hittite, Hattusha, un roi hourrite du nom de Pizikarra aurait régné à Ninive vers 1600 av. J.-C. et aurait eu une puissance suffisante pour détruire la cité d'Ebla en Syrie du Nord. Il aurait également fait alliance avec le roi hittite Mursili Ier, ce qui aurait permis d'épargner Ninive lors de l'expédition menée par celui-ci vers la Basse Mésopotamie peu après et qui aboutit au sac de Babylone. Un souverain de la Liste royale assyrienne, Shu-Ninua, qui aurait régné sur Assur vers cette période, a un nom comportant le terme Ninive, ce qui indique peut-être que les deux villes sont alors liées. En dehors de ces sources extérieures à la ville, la présence d'un royaume à Ninive à cette période est difficile à évaluer.
Comme toute la Haute Mésopotamie, Ninive est durant le XVe et le début du XIVe siècle av. J.-C. sous le contrôle des souverains du Mittani. Elle apparaît régulièrement dans les sources de cette époque par le biais de sa grande déesse, Ishtar (akkadien)/Shaushga (hourrite) de Ninive. Cette divinité est attestée au sein de listes d'offrandes de la Troisième dynastie d'Ur. Importante durant la première moitié du IIe millénaire, elle dispose d'un rayonnement international dans la seconde moitié de ce même millénaire, puisque le roi mittanien Tushratta, dont elle est la déesse personnelle, envoie sa statue en Égypte, au pharaon Amenhotep III, comme l'avait fait son prédécesseur nommé Artashumara. Cette divinité est également révérée chez les Hittites, en Anatolie.

L'intégration de Ninive dans le royaume assyrien : une importance croissante
Vers le milieu du XIVe siècle av. J.-C., Ninive est incorporée dans le royaume assyrien par Assur-uballit Ier, qui vient de vaincre le royaume du Mittani. Progressivement, l'élément hourrite tend à être supplanté par les Assyriens dans la région. Au XIIIe siècle av. J.-C., les rois Salmanazar Ier et Tukulti-Ninurta Ier rénovent à plusieurs reprises le temple d'Ishtar et semblent y accorder une grande importance, faisant de Ninive la métropole religieuse de leur royaume. Les travaux effectués du temps de Salmanazar surviennent après un séisme qui a causé la destruction de différents bâtiments, ce qui entraîne d'importants chantiers de reconstruction.
Il semble que le culte d'Ishtar de Ninive prenne une plus grande importance à partir du XIIe siècle av. J.-C. Son temple est restauré par les rois au moins jusqu'au XIe siècle av. J.-C. On connaît aussi par les textes l'existence d'un temple nommé bīt akītu à Ninive, destiné probablement au déroulement d'une fête (akītu) et considérée comme l'une des plus importantes de la tradition mésopotamienne. Salmanazar Ier est le premier roi à établir un palais royal à Ninive et deux autres sont construits sous ses successeurs ; le premier est érigé par Assur-resh-ishi Ier et Teglath-Phalasar Ier, celui de ce dernier ayant été entouré d'un jardin alimenté par un canal dérivé depuis le Khosr. Les restes de ces édifices n'ont pu être identifiés avec certitudes sur le terrain, de même que les niveaux de cette période du temple d'Ishtar. La ville basse est déjà bien développée à cette période et le tell de Nebi Yunus devient sans doute un arsenal.
Située au cœur de l'Assyrie, Ninive reste toujours une possession de ses rois dans les temps difficiles qui suivent le XIIe siècle av. J.-C., même lorsque les Araméens réduisent considérablement leurs possessions au début du Ier millénaire av. J.-C. Au début de la période néo-assyrienne (934-609 av. J.-C.), la ville profite du prestige du pays pour s'enrichir et pour gagner en importance ; les souverains assyriens continuent d'y aménager des palais et de restaurer ses temples.
Un premier changement survient quand Assurnasirpal II (883-859 av. J.-C.) déplace sa capitale d'Assur à Kalkhu, située dans la même vallée fertile que Ninive, au sud de cette dernière. En plus d'un important programme de constructions dans sa nouvelle capitale, ce roi restaure le temple d'Ishtar et y fait construire un palais où il réside souvent au début de son règne. Ses trois successeurs construisent à leur tour un palais à Ninive, le dernier, Adad-nerari III (810-783 av. J.-C.), restaurant également le temple de Nabû. Cette ville sert également de base de départ pour des expéditions menées vers la Syrie ou l'Anatolie, et est de ce fait régulièrement une résidence royale. Durant le VIIIe siècle av. J.-C., plusieurs de ses gouverneurs apparaissent dans les listes d'éponymes dont le nom sert de référence pour dater les années en Assyrie, signe de l'importance de la ville. Sargon II (721-705 av. J.-C.) change à nouveau la capitale du royaume, la déplaçant de Kalkhu à Dur-Sharrukin, fondée pour l'occasion et située quelques kilomètres au nord de Ninive. Il entreprend aussi des constructions importantes à Ninive telles que la restauration du temple d'Ishtar et de sa ziggurat et la construction d'un temple de type bīt akītu.
D'après les descriptions que donne Sennacherib, le souverain suivant, de l'état de Ninive avant les travaux qu'il y fait réaliser, on peut déduire que l'espace habité de la ville s'étendait alors sur le tell de Kuyunjik, où étaient concentrés plusieurs bâtiments publics et religieux importants, ainsi que le tell de Nebi Yunus et la ville basse au nord de Kuyunjik, où passait probablement un cours d'eau, et qui n'était pas enclose dans un mur. Le nombre de personnes vivant à Ninive à cette période a pu être estimé très approximativement à 15 000.

La nouvelle capitale de l'Empire assyrien, un gigantesque chantier
C'est le roi Sennacherib (704-681 av. J.-C.) qui entreprend vers 700 de faire de Ninive la capitale de son puissant empire, qui s'étend de l'Iran occidental à la Méditerranée. Pour cela, il va engager des moyens considérables, dans le but de faire de la ville une métropole d'une dimension bien supérieure à celles voulues par ses prédécesseurs, la plus grande et la plus belle de toutes. En ce sens, Ninive marque l'apogée de la tradition urbanistique assyrienne. En même temps, toute la campagne qui entoure la capitale est réaménagée. Cette œuvre de construction est évoquée dans divers textes relatant ce règne, d'une importance de même niveau que cella des campagnes militaires, et apparaît également dans de nombreux bas-reliefs de son palais royal.
Le roi Sennacherib commença par faire passer son périmètre de 5 à 12 km, soit une surface d'environ 750 hectares pour environ 150 hectares précédemment. La ville fut étendue en longueur, au-delà du Khosr et vers le sud (cette rivière coupant la ville en deux vers son milieu), pour atteindre 5 kilomètres de long, et en largeur, vers le nord-est, où elle mesure 2 kilomètres. Des murailles puissantes furent bâties et percées de quinze portes. Les rues furent agrandies, et une « voie royale » d'environ 31 mètres de large et bordée de stèles fut percée et devait être préservée à tout prix : quiconque construirait un bâtiment qui empièterait dessus serait empalé. Les constructeurs percèrent également des places et restaurèrent tout ce qui tombait en ruine.
D'autres aménagements importants furent entrepris pour maîtriser l'eau de la région de Ninive, afin d'améliorer la vie des habitants de la campagne et de la ville, la productivité des campagnes destinées à nourrir l'importante population de cette dernière, ainsi que de créer des espaces d'agrément. Le cours du Khosr fut canalisé, contrôlé par deux nouveaux barrages et son débit fut augmenté par le détournement d'eau venant de la région haute au nord de la ville, amenée par différents ouvrages d'art dont le plus notable est l'aqueduc de Jerwan. Sennacherib fit ensuite identifier tous les points d'eau disponibles autour de Ninive pour augmenter les disponibilités, notamment en saison chaude. Cela a permis d'augmenter la zone cultivée autour de Ninive, d'alimenter de vastes parcs et jardins hors de la ville et à l'intérieur ; tout le paysage de la région entourant Ninive fut donc bouleversé, puisqu'on alla jusqu'à créer des marécages ainsi qu'une sorte de réserve naturelle d'agrément, dans l'espace rural.
Sennacherib concentra son œuvre sur le tell de Kuyunjik, où il édifia le grand « Palais sans rival ». Les récits du roi relatifs à la fondation de cet édifice sont abondants et fournissent de nombreux détails, même s'ils contiennent des incohérences (par exemple, les dimensions de la terrasse du palais diffèrent selon les versions du texte de fondation). Le palais fut construit sur la partie sud-ouest de la citadelle, sur l'emplacement d'un ancien palais qui tombait en ruine à cause de l'érosion provoquée par la rivière Khosr, qui coulait en contrebas. Le vieil édifice fut d'abord rasé, puis le cours de la rivière fut détourné pour pouvoir élargir les puissantes fondations du palais et les relever. Ce programme put être réalisé grâce à l'exploitation d'une nouvelle carrière de pierre destinée à la réalisation des sculptures (notamment à destination de la statuaire des taureaux androcéphales), ainsi que d'une nouvelle forêt de cèdres dans les montagnes, qui permettent de compléter les anciennes régions d'extraction de ces matières premières. Ces trouvailles sont célébrées par Sennacherib comme des miracles voulus par les dieux, qui ainsi marqueraient leur approbation envers son œuvre de construction. La décoration intérieure du palais fut également l'objet de nombreuses attentions et l'occasion de réalisations spectaculaires dont se glorifiait le roi, comme les statues géantes en cuivre et en bronze, les taureaux ailés sculptés, etc. Les autres palais de Kuyunjik furent restaurés, de même que les temples, et le vieil arsenal de Nebi Yunus.
Pour réussir son entreprise, Sennacherib dut donc mobiliser des ressources matérielles énormes venant parfois d'endroits éloignés de son royaume (notamment le bois et les métaux), mais il dut également mobiliser des moyens humains considérables. Une grande partie des travaux sont effectués par des déportés, mais aussi peut-être par des sujets d'Assyrie au titre de corvée. Les récits de construction ne cachent pas le fait que certaines de ces tâches étaient harassantes, notamment l'extraction et le transport de blocs de pierres ou de sculptures monumentales. Il fallut aussi employer en nombre plus réduit des artisans et ouvriers spécialisés, qui pouvaient venir de tout l'empire, mais aussi des maîtres d'œuvre sur lesquels il existe très peu d'informations.
L'inauguration des nouvelles constructions firent l'objet de fêtes. Quand il eut achevé son « Palais sans rival », Sennacherib invita Assur et les autres grands dieux d'Assyrie (en fait les statues de leurs grands temples) à un banquet somptueux au cours duquel il leur fit des offrandes, servant à assurer la protection divine pour l'édifice. Il décida des fêtes à d'autres occasions, notamment lors de l'achèvement du canal principal, faisant des sacrifices aux dieux pour la postérité de la construction et offrant même à l'occasion des vêtements et objets précieux aux personnes qui avaient participé à sa difficile construction, geste inédit dans les récits de construction assyriens.

Les successeurs de Sennacherib continuèrent à embellir la ville et à restaurer et améliorer certains de ses édifices. Sur le tell de Nebi Yunus, Assarhaddon reconstruisit l'arsenal. À Kuyunjik, Assurbanipal, après avoir occupé dans un premier temps le palais de Sennacherib, restaura un ancien palais déjà réaménagé, le bīt-redūti (« Maison de l'héritier ») : c'est le « Palais nord ».
L'importance de la population de Ninive à son apogée demeure une question. Si on évalue le nombre d'habitants possibles en fonction de l'espace enclos par les murs, en prenant en compte un taux de 100 habitants par hectare (très approximatif étant donné que tout l'espace n'était pas habité et que d'autres quartiers étaient densément peuplés), on arriverait à approximativement 75 000 habitants.

La chute de Ninive
Après la fin du règne d'Assurbanipal, l'Assyrie décline brutalement et se retrouve menacée en son cœur par les assauts des Babyloniens et des Mèdes. En 614 av. J.-C., les Mèdes, seuls, mènent une campagne en Assyrie, campagne qui voit la chute d'Assur et un premier assaut sur Ninive, qui échoue cependant. Une seconde campagne est menée en 612, par les deux alliés ensemble, avec pour but la prise de Ninive. Le siège dure seulement trois mois, et la ville tombe ; le roi assyrien Sîn-shar-ishkun meurt durant ces combats. La ville est pillée et détruite, événement qui marque la fin de l'empire assyrien.

« La [14e année (612)], le roi d'Akkad (Babylone) rassembla ses troupes [et marcha sur l'Assyrie]. Le roi des Umman-manda (Mèdes) [se rendit] en présence du roi d'Akkad [et le roi d'Akkad et Cyaxare (le roi des Mèdes)] se rencontrèrent à [...]u. Le roi d'Akkad et son armée [traversèrent le Tigre, Cy]axare fit traverser le [Rad]anu et ils firent mouvement le long de la rive du Tigre ; au [mois de Siwan, le ...e jour, ils dressèrent le camp] devant Ninive. Du mois de Siwan au mois d'Ab, pendant 3 mois, [ils (?) ... (et)] ils livrèrent une rude bataille à la ville. Au mois d'Ab, [le ...e jour], ils infligèrent une écrasante [défaite] à un [gr]rand [peuple]. À ce moment mourut Sîn-shar-ishkun, le roi d'Assy[rie .. (?)..]. Ils prirent un important butin dans la ville et dans le temple et [réduisirent] la ville en un monceau de dé[combres]. »

— Extrait d'une chronique babylonienne rapportant la chute de Ninive.

Les fouilles de certaines portes de la cité ont apporté des éléments nouveaux sur le déroulement du siège et en particulier celles de Shamash, d'Adad et de Halzi. Elles témoignent de la préparation des Ninivites au siège, puisque leurs entrées sont rétrécies et que des tours de défense sont sans doute ajoutées à la troisième. Seule la porte d'Adad, au nord, et celle de Halzi, au sud, portent des traces d'attaque. Dans la seconde, on a retrouvé les cadavres d'une douzaine d'individus morts au cours de l'assaut final. Celle de Shamash, proche de la porte de Halzi, n'a en revanche livré aucune trace de combat. Selon D. Stronach, les assaillants auraient porté leurs attaques sur quelques points stratégiques de l'enceinte, aux extrémités nord et sud le cas échéant, pour profiter de la taille de la ville et obliger ainsi les défenseurs à se disperser. Il suppose également que les zones de la muraille bordant le Khosr ont dû faire l'objet d'assauts. Plusieurs traditions (narrées par Diodore de Sicile et dans le Livre de Nahum) rapportent qu'une inondation se serait alors produite, ce qui pourrait indiquer que la rivière a joué un rôle dans la chute de la ville.

Période post-impériale
Les trois siècles suivant la chute de l'empire assyrien sont très mal connus, en ce qui concerne la région de l'ancienne Assyrie. Il n'y a en effet quasiment pas de textes provenant de cette région et aucun n'est clairement attesté comme venant de Ninive. La culture matérielle post-assyrienne n'a pas, par conséquent, pu être déterminée.
En tant que capitale et plus grande métropole assyrienne, Ninive fut la cible principale de l'assaut final des Babyloniens et des Mèdes en 612 av. J.-C. La ville subit un pillage et des destructions très violentes, même si rien n'indique que sa population fut massivement massacrée ou déportée. Les édifices principaux ont été détruits et quelques-uns sont partiellement réoccupés peu après : le temple de Nabû, une partie du palais Sud-Ouest ainsi qu'une partie à l'est de Kuyunjik, identifiés par les fouilleurs du site comme des niveaux de « squatters », c'est-à-dire de personnes qui réutilisent des pièces et des orthostates pour aménager un habitat dans ces ruines. Les alentours de la ville sont encore habités à l'époque achéménide selon le témoignage de Xénophon, de passage dans la région lors de la retraite des Dix-Mille, vers 400 av. J.-C. Il rapporte dans son Anabase être passé avec son armée aux abords des ruines d'une ville appelée Mespila, couramment identifiée comme étant Ninive, et qui semble inhabitée à ce moment mais qui sert de refuge aux habitants de la campagne environnante du fait de ses murailles restées imposantes.

Périodes hellénistique et partho-romaine : le nouvel essor de Ninive
L'évolution politique de la Haute Mésopotamie après la chute de l'empire perse est complexe et elle est surtout connue dans les grandes lignes, la situation particulière de Ninive étant mal connue. Elle vit toutefois une reprise et redevient une ville importante au moins à la période de la domination des Parthes. Kuyunjik est apparemment encore habitée, ainsi que la ville basse au nord de Kuyunjik mais aussi au sud du Khosr, où ont été dégagés des bâtiments et des objets (des monnaies et des poteries) de cette époque. Des tombes voûtées ont également été identifiées sur la rive droite du Khosr à l'est de Kuyunjik.
Après la bataille de Gaugamèles remportée par le Macédonien Alexandre le Grand contre l'armée perse en 331 av. J.-C. et qui s'est probablement déroulée dans la plaine à proximité de Ninive, l'Assyrie passe sous domination grecque. Elle est ensuite contrôlée par les rois séleucides, puis devient l'objet de conflits entre plusieurs royaumes qui se succèdent sur son sol : vers 141 av. J.-C., le roi des Parthes Mithridate Ier vainc une première fois les Séleucides, et ses successeurs chassent les rois grecs définitivement de Mésopotamie, après d'autres conflits. La situation politique de la Haute Mésopotamie sous la période parthe est complexe. Vers 80 av. J.-C., le roi Tigrane II d'Arménie étend temporairement son royaume sur le Nord de la Mésopotamie, qui repasse ensuite sous domination parthe malgré les tentatives romaines. Elle voit aussi le développement du royaume d'Adiabène qui change plusieurs fois d'alliance dans les rivalités des grandes puissances. En 116, lors de l'invasion de la région par Trajan, Ninive est intégrée à l’éphémère province romaine d'Assyrie, qui disparaîtra en moins d'un an. Durant les décennies suivantes, la Haute Mésopotamie vit une période tourmentée, car elle est située dans la zone de lutte entre Romains et Parthes puis Sassanides.
Il semble que Ninive devienne à un moment une cité grecque et une communauté de colons grecs s'y installe. Cette fondation remonte peut-être au règne de Séleucos Ier, fondateur de la dynastie des Séleucides, vers 300 av. J.-C., ou sous un de ses successeurs ; à moins qu'il ne faille retenir une date bien plus tardive, vers 80 av. J.-C., sous Tigrane II d'Arménie, souverain hellénisé. En réalité, nous sommes informés du fait que Ninive est une cité peuplée par une communauté grecque par des trouvailles provenant essentiellement de la période de la domination des Parthes. Des pièces de période séleucide et parthe ont en effet été trouvées dans la ville, qui a peut-être disposé d'un atelier de frappe de monnaies. Plusieurs inscriptions en grec ont été trouvées sur des objets exhumés à Ninive. Une colonne a été dédicacée à des dieux par un certain Apollophanes, stratège et épistate de la cité. L'œuvre d'art la plus remarquable de cette période est une statue de 50 cm de haut en calcaire représentant Héraclès Epitrapezios (identifié comme Hermès lors de sa découverte), réalisée par un certain Diogène au Ier siècle ou au IIe siècle de notre ère. Elle a été déposée dans un petit temple (de 3 mètres sur 4,4 mètres) dégagé dans la ville basse juste au nord de Nebi Yunus et dont le plan rappelle les anciens temples d'époque assyrienne. À proximité, on a retrouvé un ancien autel assyrien inscrit au nom de Sennacherib et réutilisé puis dédicacé par un magistrat local nommé Apollonios. Cette partie de la ville basse semble donc être importante durant les premiers siècles après Jésus-Christ. Cependant, ces traces d'hellénisation de la région ne remettent pas en question le fait que la région soit majoritairement peuplée d'Araméens, tandis que les Grecs perdent en importance au fil du temps.

Kuyunjik reste la partie principale de Ninive, sans doute celle où se trouvent les bâtiments publics les plus importants, notamment les temples. Des poteries, des restes de colonnes ou de statues de la période parthe y ont été exhumées. Deux trésors de monnaies contenant des pièces romaines et parthes du IIIe siècle apr. J.-C. ont été fouillés. Des tombes situées sur les ruines de l'ancien temple d'Ishtar ont livré un riche matériel, notamment des bijoux en or et pierres précieuses, datant probablement du début du IIe siècle après Jésus-Christ. Tout cela atteste de la prospérité de Ninive à cette période.

Périodes sassanide et islamique : un important lieu de culte
Après la désastreuse campagne de l'empereur romain Julien face aux Perses Sassanides en 363 apr. J.-C., Ninive passe sous le contrôle de ces derniers qui y installent à leur tour une garnison frontalière. La culture matérielle de la ville acquiert alors des traits perses qui se retrouvent dans les quelques découvertes de cette période (monnaies, sceaux, objets en verre, etc.), provenant généralement de Kuyunjik, l'habitat semblant alors se resserrer autour de ce tell et de celui de Nebi Yunus. En 627, la plaine de Ninive est le théâtre d'une bataille entre les troupes byzantines et sassanides. C'est un peu plus de dix ans plus tard, en 637/8 ou en 641/2 que Ninive est prise par les troupes arabo-musulmanes.

Sur le plan religieux, Ninive est alors devenue une cité chrétienne importante (tout en hébergeant une communauté juive elle aussi de taille notable), puisque s'y trouvent les sièges d'évêchés nestorien et jacobite, ce dernier étant occupé au VIIe siècle par le théologien Isaac de Ninive qui n'y reste que cinq mois, ce qui n'empêche pas qu'on l'associe couramment à cette ville. Un monastère nestorien est construit sur Nebi Yunus, sans doute en lien avec la légende rapportant la venue du prophète Jonas à Ninive. Les souverains perses, bien que zoroastriens, tolèrent la religion chrétienne et restaurent parfois les monastères de la région. La même tolérance existe sous les premiers temps de la domination musulmane, mais une large partie de la population se convertit peu à peu à l'islam. Divers objets retrouvés à Kuyunjik attestent de la présence d'une communauté paléo-chrétienne dans la ville. Elle est notamment caractérisée par des poteries marquées d'une croix à branches de longueurs égales, motif qui se retrouve également sur une lampe en alliage à base de cuivre, et des plaques de stuc représentant des croix de différentes formes, qui sont des sortes d'icônes caractéristiques du christianisme de l'Irak des VIIe et VIIIe siècles.
Après la conquête arabe, Ninive décline face à sa voisine Mossoul, qui devient peu après la conquête une ville militaire (miṣr) et la capitale politique de la région, disposant d'une forte garnison, puis connaît une forte croissance. L'évêché nestorien de Ninive fut finalement fusionné à celui de Mossoul au IXe siècle. Cependant, une portion du site de l'antique capitale assyrienne garde une certaine importance : la colline de Nebi Yunus, qui passe pour porter le tombeau du prophète Jonas et qui a de ce fait le statut de lieu de pèlerinage, l'un des plus fréquentés de la Haute Mésopotamie. Une mosquée remplace l'ancien monastère chrétien. Elle est entourée au Xe siècle d'une hôtellerie visant à accueillir les pèlerins, à l'initiative de l'émir de Mossoul, Nasir al-Dawla des Hamdanides. Elle voisinait également un cimetière où sont enterrés des personnes recherchant la proximité du lieu saint. Une source thermale située à l'est du tell (ʿAyn Yūnus) est également visitée par des malades cherchant la guérison. Ce site apparaît dans les textes arabes des époques médiévale et moderne comme le Tall al-Tawba, la « Colline du repentir », en référence à la mission qu'aurait accomplie Jonas sur ce lieu. Quant au tell de Kuyunjik, il apparaît sous le nom de Kalʿat Nunia, la « Citadelle de Ninive », ou plus simplement al-Kalʿa, « la Citadelle », en référence aux ruines qui s'y trouvent. Son nom actuel est celui d'un village qui y est attesté au début du XIXe siècle, peuplé par des paysans de la minorité religieuse des Yézidis. Ils sont massacrés en 1836 au cours d'un des accès de violence religieuse qui agite alors la Haute Mésopotamie, et leur village est détruit, ce qui explique pourquoi les premiers fouilleurs purent explorer ce tell.

Ninive à son apogée
Après être devenue capitale de l'Assyrie sous Sennacherib, Ninive est l'une des principales villes du Moyen-Orient au VIIe siècle av. J.-C. Ce sont les niveaux archéologiques de cette période qui ont le plus attiré l'attention des différentes équipes de fouilleurs du site, ce qui justifie un développement plus long sur l'état de la ville à ce moment.
Ninive s'organise autour de deux tells séparés par la rivière Khosr : au sud, Nebi Yunus, et au nord, Kuyunjik. La première partie a été très peu explorée et semble avoir de toute manière été d'une moindre importance comparée à Kuyunjik. Hormis quelques temples, on y trouvait un ancien arsenal (ekal mašarti) restauré par Assarhaddon. L'espace urbain postérieur à l'œuvre de Sennacherib occupait une surface de 750 hectares entourés par une muraille de 12 km. Elle était alimentée en eau par divers canaux provenant des collines environnantes et les deux rivières bordant la cité.
Ninive était enfin un important centre cultuel. S'y trouvaient plusieurs temples. Tout d'abord, celui de la déesse principale de la ville, Ishtar de Ninive, et sa ziggurat, situés à Kuyunjik. La ville renfermait aussi d'importants temples dédiés à Nabû, Assur, Adad, etc.
Étant la dernière capitale voulue et construite par un monarque de l'empire assyrien, après les chantiers de Kalkhu sous Assurnasirpal II (883-859 av. J.-C.) puis Dur-Sharrukin sous Sargon II (722-705 av. J.-C.), le propre père de Sennacherib, Ninive est l'apogée de la tradition architecturale et urbanistique de cette civilisation. Cette métropole est un concentré des capacités des aménageurs assyriens : les travaux entrepris sous Sennacherib et ses successeurs attestent de leurs connaissances dans les aménagements hydrauliques alors que les ouvrages défensifs, les jardins, l'urbanisme, les constructions publiques et les palais royaux du tell de Kuyunjik témoignent d'un savoir-faire remarquable.

Aménagements hydrauliques
Bien que naturellement alimentée par le Khosr et proche du Tigre ainsi que de diverses sources naturelles, Ninive n'est pas suffisamment bien alimentée en eau pour pouvoir devenir la grande capitale que souhaite Sennacherib. Ce dernier cherchait surtout à arroser les jardins qu'il crée et à étendre la surface agricole servant à nourrir la cité. Le projet est donc d'ampleur régionale et il implique la rénovation des canaux existant, la création de nouveaux, ainsi que la construction de plusieurs barrages et d'autres ouvrages hydrauliques comme un aqueduc. Sennacherib prétendit avoir fait aménager tous les points d'eau connus des alentours de Ninive. Cependant, ce dispositif ne suffit pas puisqu'il fallait aller capter l'eau de divers cours d'eau dans les régions hautes situées au nord de la ville.
Certains de ces aménagements ont été fouillés ou repérés sur le terrain et plus récemment par l'utilisation de photographies aériennes et d'images satellites. Ces ouvrages ont aussi fait l'objet d'inscriptions de Sennacherib, accompagnées de bas-reliefs à Khinis et Maltai au nord de Ninive à proximité de certains ouvrages. Si ce roi se situe dans la continuité de ses prédécesseurs, qui ont également fait réaliser des aménagements hydrauliques importants autour des anciennes capitales assyriennes, une nouvelle fois il pousse la démarche à un niveau supérieur, ce qui impliquait la mobilisation de moyens considérables. Comme l'eau était captée dans une région au relief tourmenté, il fallait parfois creuser la roche et dégager de grands espaces. Ces aménagements supposaient des ingénieurs connaissant bien la topographie et le climat de la région, ainsi que le régime de ses cours d'eau. Finalement, ils ont modifié le réseau hydrologique de la région de Ninive et son paysage. Cela demandait une administration lourde et un entretien constant, et, quand l'empire assyrien s'est effondré, le système n'a pas duré, même si certains aménagements ont pu être restaurés localement pendant de longues périodes.

Plusieurs étapes peuvent être distinguées dans le programme de construction d'un réseau de canaux lors de l'extension de Ninive, qui dura principalement une quinzaine d'années, de 702 à 688 av. J.-C. La première phase vit la réalisation du canal de Kisiri qui reliait alors le nord de la ville et rejoignait le Khosr 13 kilomètres en amont, au niveau du barrage de Shallahat, proche de Dur-Sharrukin. Un barrage est construit sur le Khosr à Ajileh, juste en amont de Ninive. Les aménagements les plus importants sont réalisés plus au nord : un système de cours d'eau canalisés et de canaux creusés long d'environ 100 kilomètres servait à dériver les eaux de cours d'eau situés dans des régions de collines au nord-est, dont celles d'affluents du Grand Zab (qui se jette dans le Tigre en aval du Khosr). Sur son tracé, on a retrouvé un important aqueduc, à Jerwan, permettant au canal de franchir une vallée où coule un wadi. Il fait 280 mètres de long pour 22 mètres de large, et sa construction a demandé environ 2 millions de blocs de pierre. Le wadi et probablement une piste passaient sous l'aqueduc en son centre dans des passages voûtés. Le canal situé en amont de Jerwan est celui de Khinis, qui capte les eaux de l'actuel Gomel sur plus de 50 kilomètres. C'est sans doute le dernier à avoir été réalisé, et le plus long. Un autre système de canaux véhicule de l'eau provenant de plus au nord-ouest, vers Maltai.

« Sur une longue distance, depuis le fleuve Husur (le Khosr), je fis creuser un canal vers les prairies de Ninive ; par-dessus des wadis profonds je fis passer un pont de pierres blanches et je fis couler ces eaux dessus. »

— Inscription de Sennacherib sur l'aqueduc de Jerwan.
Les canaux sont de tailles diverses selon la quantité d'eau qu'ils devaient capter et transporter : celui de Khinis, en amont du barrage de Jerwan, faisait environ 6 mètres de large pour 2 mètres de profondeur car il captait encore peu de cours d'eau ; il s'élargit ensuite autour d'une vingtaine de mètres pour capter l'eau de nouvelles rivières. Par endroits, des canaux creusés avaient nécessité le dégagement d'un espace de près de 70-100 mètres de large (qui ne correspond pas forcément à la largeur du canal).

Les remparts et les portes
Les murailles de la ville au temps de Sennacherib étaient un ouvrage impressionnant, qui a frappé l'imagination dès l'Antiquité : Diodore de Sicile lui attribue une longueur de 27 kilomètres. En réalité, la muraille était constituée de deux enceintes (une intérieure et une extérieure) qui encerclaient la ville sur une longueur d'environ 12 km, suivant un tracé de forme trapézoïdale. Les longs côtés étaient constitués par la partie est de la muraille qui courait sur environ 5 kilomètres et la partie ouest qui mesurait 4,1 kilomètres de long, tandis que les petits côtés mesuraient 2 kilomètres au nord, et 800 mètres au sud. Les murs étaient faits avec de grands blocs calcaires provenant de carrières situées 50 km en amont le long du Tigre, renforcés par des briques crues en argile. Le système défensif était très puissant, et, à certains endroits, son épaisseur approchait les 45 mètres, tandis que, selon les dires de Sennacherib, sa hauteur était de 25 mètres. Le nom antique des deux enceintes était évocateur quant à leurs fonctions : « mur dont l'éclat submerge l'ennemi » (en sumérien BÀD NÍ.GAL.BI KÚR.RA ŠÚ.ŠÚ) pour l'enceinte intérieure ; « mur qui terrifie le Mal » (BÀD NÍG.ERÍM HU.LUH.HA) pour l'enceinte extérieure. Des fossés d'environ 55 mètres de large avaient été creusés en avant des murailles et devaient donc être franchis par des ponts, dont deux ont pu être repérés en face des portes de Shamash et de Halzi. Les deux tells principaux étaient également protégés par une enceinte.
Dix-huit portes perçaient la muraille extérieure selon les textes de fondation les plus récents de Sennacherib, mais seulement une douzaine ont été localisées avec certitude. Au sud, la porte d'Assur accueillait les voyageurs ayant remonté le long du Tigre, depuis la direction de la ville du même nom. À l'ouest, la muraille comptait au moins cinq portes, et à l'est, six. Au nord, il y avait trois portes, portant respectivement les noms des dieux Adad, Nergal et Sîn, auxquelles elles étaient dédiées. Chacune de ces portes avait sa particularité, signe que les Ninivites portaient grande attention à ces édifices, censés frapper le visiteur à l'instant même où il pénètre dans la cité. Elles étaient de plus flanquées de tours défensives. La localisation de trois portes connues par les textes est discutée, le plus probable étant qu'elles soient situées sur la muraille ouest : celle de Handuri, celle du Quai et celle du Désert.
Plusieurs portes ont fait l'objet de fouilles, plus ou moins précises et certaines ont été partiellement restaurées par le Département des Antiquités irakiennes. La porte de Halzi, située au sud de la ville, est l'une des plus imposantes portes de Ninive et la mieux connue par les archéologues. De forme rectangulaire, elle occupe environ 70 mètres dans la muraille orientale. L'entrée (de 7 mètres de large à l'origine) se trouvait dans un angle, et l'accès depuis l'extérieur s'y faisait par un pont. L'édifice s'organise autour d'une cour centrale de 45 mètres sur 19 mètres, où ont été dégagés 22 orthostates disposés sur le mur ouest. Huit tours de qualité différente protégeaient la porte, les moins solides ayant probablement été construites devant l'imminence du siège de la ville entre 614 et 612 av. J.-C., période qui vit également l'entrée être réduite à 2 mètres de large.
La porte de Mashki a été ciblée lors des destructions perpétrées par Daesh à Ninive en 2016. Par la suite des restaurations et fouilles y ont été entreprises, qui ont mis au jour en 2022 des fragments de bas-reliefs semblables à ceux qui ornaient les palais royaux.

La ville basse
D'abord relatée dans la description qu'en donne Sennacherib, dans les textes relatant les aménagements qu'il fit faire à Ninive, la ville basse est un peu mieux connue à la suite de prospections menées dans sa partie nord à la fin des années 1980, limitées toutefois par la progression de l'urbanisation sur le site. La ville basse de Ninive est coupée en deux par le cours du Khosr. Ce dernier et les autres cours d'eau et fossés de la ville étaient franchissables par plusieurs ponts, les emplacements de certains ayant pu être repérés. Plusieurs grandes avenues, dont certaines étaient pavées, reliaient les portes principales. La plus importante était la « Voie royale », qui aurait mesuré environ 28,50 mètres ou plus de large et était délimitée par des stèles sur ses côtés.

« En ce temps-là, j'agrandis le site de Ninive, ma cité royale. J'élargis ses rues afin qu'elles conviennent à une "voie royale" et les fis briller comme le jour. Afin qu'à l'avenir la voie royale ne puisse pas devenir plus étroite, je la fis border de stèles qui se faisaient face. Je donnais à cette voie une largeur de 62 grandes coudées, jusqu'à la porte du Parc. Si jamais un habitant de cette ville détruit sa vieille maison pour en bâtir une autre et fait empiéter les fondations de sa maison sur la voie royale, on l'empalera sur un pieu planté sur sa maison. »

— Inscription de Sennacherib sur la « Voie royale ».
S. Lumsden a proposé d'identifier les fonctions de différentes parties de la ville : au nord de Kuyunjik, et dans la partie située entre ce tell et Nebi Yunus, on aurait trouvé les résidences des élites, tandis que la partie située au sud de Nebi Yunus aurait eu une fonction surtout militaire. La partie orientale de la moitié nord aurait été occupée par une « Terrasse orientale », où se trouvaient peut-être des jardins internes à la ville, en sachant qu'il y en avait aussi à l'extérieur à proximité des murailles, probablement le long du cours du Tigre, à l'ouest.
Avant que Sennacherib n'étende le périmètre de Ninive, la ville basse occupait un espace au nord du tell de Kuyunjik nommé la « Vieille ville ». Les prospections y ont identifié pour le VIIe siècle av. J.-C. un ensemble de résidences luxueuses organisées autour de cours centrales vastes, avec de larges rues délimitant les îlots d'habitation. Il s'agit donc manifestement d'un quartier d'élites, situé à proximité du centre du pouvoir. Au nord de celui-ci, et jusqu'aux murailles, un quartier d'artisanat à l'habitat plus tassé a été repéré. Des ateliers de potiers et de métallurgistes ont été repérés. Ces deux quartiers étaient bordés à l'est par une large voie reliant la porte de Nergal à Kuyunjik, peut-être la « Voie royale ». La partie nord-est du site est moins bien connue. Elle comprenait elle aussi des ateliers de céramique.
Au sud du Khosr, plusieurs édifices ont été repérés. Un premier a été identifié comme étant un bīt hilāni (type de bâtiment d'origine syrienne caractérisé par un portique à colonnes servant d'entrée), en raison des bases de piliers repérées, ce qui est en fait insuffisant pour le définir comme un édifice de ce type. À proximité, un bâtiment de type palatial a été exploré, organisé autour d'au moins une grande cour, qui a livré deux tablettes cunéiformes. Des abreuvoirs à chevaux portant des inscriptions au nom de Sennacherib ont également été mis au jour près des murailles juste au nord de Nebi Yunus.
La partie est de Ninive, au nord du Khosr, a vu la réalisation d'un aménagement original lors des travaux entrepris par Sennacherib : la « Terrasse orientale ». Surélevée par rapport au reste de la cité basse, S. Lumsden en a proposé une fonction spécifique dans le projet de Sennacherib qui concernait aussi la vie des habitants de la capitale. Selon lui, elle procurait un espace d'où admirer un panorama de la métropole au temps de son apogée. En effet, elle était probablement ouverte au public, car elle n'était pas fortifiée à la différence des citadelles de Kuyunjik et Nebi Yunus. C'est peut-être un des endroits où se trouvaient des vergers et jardins à l'intérieur de la ville, évoqués dans les récits sur la construction de Ninive. D'autres propositions sont possibles telles : fonction cérémonielle, espace commercial ou récréatif, etc.

Les jardins de Ninive
Des jardins avaient été aménagés en divers points de la cité, à l'intérieur des murs, mais aussi à l'extérieur le long des deux cours d'eau alimentant la ville et des canaux. Leur repérage sur le terrain est plus problématique et leur localisation est pour l'instant de l'ordre de l'hypothèse. Ils ont eu une fonction cruciale dans l'idéologie du pouvoir des rois qui les ont fait construire. S'y trouvait une grande quantité d'essences d'arbres, surtout des arbres fruitiers, de la vigne, le relief et l'espace étant parfois modifiés pour imiter les régions montagneuses ou marécageuses. Ainsi, les rois reproduisaient en miniature les régions qu'ils avaient conquises, et introduisaient dans leurs jardins des plantes inconnues en Assyrie, comme le cotonnier, appelé « arbre à laine ». Pour leur agrément, ils construisaient des petits édifices, où ils pouvaient donner des banquets. Des animaux exotiques venant des pays conquis étaient également introduits pour le bon plaisir des rois et surtout montrer l'ampleur de leur pouvoir, car ils symbolisaient la domination exercée par les souverains sur les pays d'où ils venaient, et leur capacité à recréer un espace fertile plein de vie dans un lieu auparavant désertique. Il s'agissait donc non seulement de jardins, mais aussi de sortes de zoos, de véritables parcs, solidaires de la conception du pouvoir et du monde de la royauté assyrienne.

« Pour contrôler le flot de ces eaux (du fleuve et des canaux), je fis un marais et y plantai une cannaie. J'y laissai en liberté des hérons, des sangliers et des cerfs. Par la volonté divine, dans les jardins au sol fraîchement labouré, poussèrent en abondance de la vigne, toutes sortes d’arbres fruitiers, des oliviers et des arbres aromatiques. Des cyprès, des mûriers (?), ainsi que toutes sortes d'arbres, y poussèrent en grande taille et eurent des rejets. Les marais se développèrent rapidement. Les oiseaux du ciel, les hérons dont la région d'origine est lointaine, y firent leurs nids. Les sangliers et les cerfs y donnèrent naissance à une multitude de petits. Je coupai les cyprès et les mûriers qui avaient grandi dans les jardins, ainsi que les roseaux des marais et je les utilisai pour la construction de mes palais royaux. On récolta du coton (« on tondit les arbres porteurs de laine ») et on en tissa pour faire des vêtements. »

— L'aménagement des parcs royaux de Ninive, d'après une inscription de Sennacherib.
Suivant les descriptions des bas-reliefs des palais et des textes, les jardins étaient alimentés par des aqueducs, et peut-être même par des conduites amenant l'eau sur des terrasses surélevées. Si on accepte l'existence de tels jardins surélevés, on peut suivre la proposition de Stephanie Dalley (en) selon laquelle il faudrait chercher à Ninive l'origine des « jardins suspendus de Babylone », qui ne se trouveraient en réalité pas dans cette dernière cité (où ils ne sont attestés ni dans les textes ni par l'archéologie), mais plutôt à Ninive, où les indices seraient un peu plus consistants (mais pas déterminants). La proposition de Dalley a fait l'objet de diverses critiques. L'existence de « jardins suspendus » n'est en réalité pas plus certaine en Assyrie qu'en Babylonie, vu qu'ils ne sont pas explicitement évoqués dans les textes ni repérés sur place, mais peut-être représentés sur un bas-relief, qui peut s'interpréter autrement. Il est impossible de savoir en quoi auraient consisté exactement ces éventuels jardins surélevés, quelle apparence ils auraient prise, quels mécanismes auraient été en jeu.

Nebi Yunus, l'arsenal de Ninive
Sur une surface de 14 hectares, situé à environ 1 kilomètre au sud de Kuyunjik, le tell de Nebi Yunus (« Prophète Jonas ») est, comme son nom l'indique, le lieu où la tradition veut que le prophète Jonas ait été enterré. Ce dernier aurait en effet été envoyé à Ninive par Dieu, ce que relate le Livre de Jonas, qui sert de source sur l'histoire de Ninive et de sa chute, et a beaucoup compté dans la préservation de la mémoire de la cité après sa destruction. Ce tell est donc un lieu saint, qui attire des pèlerins, et est surmonté d'une mosquée, en plus d'un village. Cela a donc empêché d'y faire des fouilles de grande dimension, même si quelques campagnes ont pu être effectuées au bord du tell par des équipes irakiennes.
En l'absence de fouilles importantes sur place, il est impossible de savoir quand commence le peuplement de ce tell. Les connaissances des archéologues reposent essentiellement sur des trouvailles épigraphiques effectuées sur le tell et ailleurs, notamment des inscriptions de fondation laissées par les rois assyriens ayant entrepris des constructions sur le site, avant tout Sennacherib et son fils Assarhaddon. La plus ancienne attestation de construction sur le site remonterait au règne d'Adad-nerari III (882-859 av. J.-C.), mais c'est à partir du règne de Sennacherib que l'on dispose de connaissances correctes sur le tell, qui entre dans son programme de travaux à Ninive.
Les textes des rois assyriens nous apprennent qu'ils avaient bâti sur ce tell un arsenal, appelé ekal kutalli (« palais arrière » ou « palais de la réserve (militaire) ») ou ekal mašarti (« palais de la revue (militaire) »). Sennacherib dit avoir détruit un bâtiment plus ancien dont on ignore la nature exacte, pour construire cet édifice. Si on se base sur les fouilles effectuées dans l'arsenal de Kalkhu et la description qu'en donnent les textes de Sennacherib, ce bâtiment dispose de bâtiments résidentiels s'apparentant à un palais royal à côté desquels se trouve l'arsenal à proprement parler. Il sert de quartier général aux armées assyriennes. Nebi Yunus avait donc une fonction militaire, comportant des magasins, des ateliers de fabrications d'armes, des étables pour chevaux. C'est également là que l'on entreposait une partie du butin de guerre rapporté par l'armée d'Assyrie. Sennacherib dit avoir bâti deux ensembles de bâtiments résidentiels, probablement avec une salle du trône et des appartements, l'un dans un style « assyrien », l'autre dans un style « du Hatti », en fait de Syrie, donc probablement une construction de type bīt-hilani. Assarhaddon entreprend à son tour un programme de constructions autour de l'arsenal, qui est considérablement agrandi. Une de ses inscriptions indique la fonction de l'édifice : « maintenir le campement (et) garder les chevaux, les mulets, les chars, l'équipement militaire, les instruments de guerre, et le butin fait sur l'ennemi ». Il s'attache surtout à faire de la partie résidentielle un palais royal plus vaste. C'est la construction la plus importante entreprise par ce souverain à Ninive et c'est peut-être là qu'il réside une partie de l'année. Son fils Assurbanipal effectue également des travaux dans l'arsenal.
Les fouilleurs irakiens ont retrouvé sur Nebi Yunus divers objets en 1954, dont quelques tablettes, un prisme inscrit d'Assarhaddon, et des pièces de butin rapportées par les rois assyriens à la suite de campagnes victorieuses, notamment trois statues du pharaon Taharqa et une statuette en bronze de la déesse égyptienne Anoukis. Ils ont également dégagé au nord-est du tell une porte monumentale menant à l'arsenal, dont les montants sont gardés par des taureaux androcéphales comme il est habituel dans les palais assyriens. Lors de travaux de restauration dans le sanctuaire de Jonas, au milieu des années 1970, les ouvriers ont mis au jour un fragment de bas-relief sur orthostates, représentant des personnages conduisant des chevaux. Par la suite lors de l'occupation du site par l'État islamique, après la destruction du mausolée de Jonas, les Djihadistes ont creusé des galeries dans le tell (apparemment pour prendre des objets d'art et les revendre) et mis au jour des éléments du palais d'Assarhaddon qui ont pu être explorés après la reprise du site par les troupes irakiennes, notamment fragments de bas-reliefs, et des inscriptions murales.

Kuyunjik, le cœur de l'empire assyrien
Le cœur de Ninive est le tell de Kuyunjik, qui tient son nom d'un village établi sur son bord nord-est avant les premières fouilles, qui signifierait en turc « petit mouton ». C'est la partie la plus anciennement peuplée, depuis le VIIe millénaire av. J.-C., celle autour de laquelle elle s'est développée et qui a fait de loin l'objet du plus de campagnes de fouilles car elle était quasi déserte quand les archéologues ont investi le site. Il s'étend sur plus de 40 hectares, mesurant sur sa longueur maximale environ 1 kilomètre et 600 mètres sur sa largeur maximale et surplombe aujourd'hui la plaine environnante de plus de 30 mètres. Après les travaux de Sennacherib, c'est le centre de l'empire assyrien, où se trouvent les palais royaux principaux, la famille royale, la cour, et les archives royales. Ce tell conserve sa fonction traditionnelle d'espace sacré, car on y trouve le temple de la divinité tutélaire de la ville, Ishtar de Ninive, qui a une fonction importante dans l'empire assyrien, avec sa ziggourat qui dominait toute la ville, ainsi que le temple du dieu Nabû.

Les temples
Le centre du tell de Kuyunjik est occupé par un groupe de temples, dont l'établissement doit remonter aux périodes les plus anciennes du site. Le temple d'Ishtar de Ninive, déesse tutélaire de la cité aussi connue sous les noms de Shaushga, Inanna, Ninlil/Mullissu, déesses de diverses origines unies par syncrétisme, ou encore sous l'épithète « Dame de Ninive », est le principal lieu de culte de la cité. Il est connu sous le nom sumérien É.MÈŠ.MÈŠ ou É.MAŠ.MAŠ, mais apparaît aussi sous le nom de É.GAL (« grande maison/temple » en sumérien), qui généralement désigne un palais, ou encore bīt nathi (« maison/temple du lit », le second terme étant d'origine hourrite), qui semble désigner plus spécifiquement les appartements de la déesse dans le temple, où avaient lieu les rituels majeurs. Lors de ses fouilles qui n'ont dégagé qu'une partie de l'édifice, une trentaine de phases ont été distinguées, s'étendant au moins du IVe millénaire au VIe siècle av. J.-C. Les datations et parfois même la pertinence de toutes ces phases font l'objet de discussion, notamment en raison de relevés de fouilles imprécis. C'est un édifice particulièrement important pour la connaissance du site, grâce aux nombreuses trouvailles d'objets et d'inscriptions qui y ont été effectuées, car il s'agissait du cœur historique de Kuyunjik, qui a fait l'objet de nombreuses attentions de la part des souverains dominant la Haute Mésopotamie au moins à partir du début du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. Si l'on se fie à l'inscription laissée par Samsi-Addu lors de sa reconstruction au XVIIIe siècle av. J.-C., Manishtusu d'Akkad l'aurait (re)bâti au XXIIIe siècle av. J.-C., mais cela n'est pas vérifiable. Il est en tout cas constamment rénové par les souverains assyriens jusqu'à la chute du site. Pour l'époque néo-assyrienne, le premier chantier de rénovation important date du temps d'Assurnasirpal II au IXe siècle av. J.-C. puisque des clous de fondation, des dalles sculptées et des briques émaillées ont été retrouvés. Sennacherib le place dans la liste des monuments de la ville qu'il a restaurés, mais les traces de ses travaux sur place sont maigres. Assurbanipal est le dernier à organiser la décoration de l'édifice et de sa ziggurat.
Localisé au centre même du tell, ce temple est mal connu en raison de ses fouilles incomplètes. Les reconstitutions proposées par J. Reade semblent indiquer que son plan n'a pas subi de grands changements depuis le temps de Samsi-Addu. Il est de forme rectangulaire et d'orientation sud-ouest/nord-est, mesure environ 55 mètres de large pour au moins 106 mètres de long. L'entrée semble s'effectuer par le côté sud-ouest, qui mène à l'époque néo-assyrienne à une première cour menant à une seconde plus vaste qui occupe le centre de l'édifice. La cella abritant la statue de la déesse et son trône se trouvait manifestement dans la continuité vers le nord-est, mais elle n'a pas été dégagée. Le temple était associé à une ziggurat dédiée elle aussi à Ishtar, dont il ne reste plus rien et qui n'est donc connue que par des inscriptions royales et une prière néo-assyrienne à la déesse. Samsi-Addu lui attribue à elle aussi une première construction sous Manishtusu. Il se charge de l'agrandir, et plus tard elle est restaurée par Salmanazar Ier puis par les rois Sargonides. Elle était peut-être située juste au sud-ouest du temple, en face de l'entrée principale de celui-ci et également du palais sud-ouest, au point le plus élevé de Kuyunjik et donc de toute la ville. Un dernier édifice associé au culte d'Ishtar de Ninive était son bīt akītu connu uniquement par des inscriptions des rois néo-assyriens (mais peut-être existant dès l'époque médio-assyrienne) y ayant entrepris des travaux. Sa localisation sur Kuyunjik ; il est peut-être à chercher vers le nord ou l'ouest du grand temple. Il s'agit d'un type d'édifice cultuel courant dans les grandes villes babyloniennes et adopté en Assyrie, servant lors de la grande fête nommée akītu qui avait généralement lieu lors du Nouvel An, durant laquelle une grande procession reliait le temple principal d'Ishtar au bīt akītu, la statue de la déesse faisant le trajet sur son chariot processionnel. Un autre bīt akītu semble avoir été bâti par Sennacherib, mais hors des murs de Ninive, comme cela était courant pour ce type de bâtiment.
C'est dans le temple qu'a notamment été découverte la tête en bronze d'un souverain de la dynastie d'Akkad (peut-être Naram-Sîn), qui est considérée comme l'une des plus belles œuvres d'art de la Mésopotamie antique. De nombreuses autres trouvailles d'objets de culte ou de tablettes ont également été réalisées dans le secteur du temple d'Ishtar.
Plusieurs autres temples du tell de Kuyunjik sont connus uniquement par des textes, dédiés à Assur, Kidmuri (un aspect d'Ishtar) et aux Sibitti. Un seul autre a été dégagé au cours de fouilles, à savoir le temple d'époque néo-assyrienne dédié à Nabû, situé au nord du temple d'Ishtar. Il était nommé É.ZI.DA (« Temple juste »), comme d'autres temples de ce même dieu connus à Kalkhu et Borsippa. Sa construction semble attribuable à Adad-nerari III vers 788-787 av. J.-C., fervent dévot du dieu, et il a fait l'objet de rénovations sous Assurbanipal. La partie qui en a été dégagée constitue un ensemble de forme trapézoïdale, bâti sur une terrasse, et s'organisant autour d'une cour centrale de 35 mètres sur 26 mètres. Le temple s'étendait peut-être plus loin sur le côté sud-ouest, dans un espace non fouillé. Une bibliothèque (girginakku) y était conservée, Nabû étant le dieu de la sagesse. Les autres temples connus par les textes étaient dédiés à Ishtar de Kidmuri (une ville assyrienne), au dieu national assyrien Assur, aux Sibitti, groupe de sept divinités guerrières, aux divinités astrales : Sîn (le dieu-lune) et Shamash (le dieu-soleil), associés dans le même lieu de culte comme c'est le cas à Assur, et également au dieu de l'orage Adad, disposant d'une ziggurat, ce qui fait que deux édifices de ce type se trouvaient sur l'acropole de Ninive.

Les palais royaux
Ninive a servi de résidence royale temporaire à plusieurs reprises avant le règne de Sennacherib, et possédait donc un palais sur le tell de Kuyundjik au moins à partir du IXe siècle av. J.-C. Les fouilles de Campbell Thompson et Hutchinson ont ainsi dégagé les ruines d'un édifice palatial ayant livré plusieurs inscriptions d'Assurnasirpal II (883-859) qui y a sans doute résidé au début de son règne. Ils y ont retrouvé des fragments de décoration murale : peintures représentant des rosettes et des personnages, certaines étant des scènes militaires peintes sur des orthostates qui sont donc des précurseurs des bas-reliefs ultérieurs.
Les différents palais royaux de Kuyunjik datés de la période finale de l'empire assyrien (VIIe siècle av. J.-C.), servant de centre de l'empire à partir du règne de Sennacherib, sont l'aboutissement d'une longue tradition de constructions de ce type d'édifices entamée dès le IXe siècle av. J.-C. par Assurnasirpal II à Kalkhu, et poursuivie par ses successeurs sur le même site puis à Dur-Sharrukin. Il s'agit du type de monument le plus impressionnant et représentatif de la civilisation assyrienne, qui n'a pas d'équivalent dans le reste du Proche-Orient ancien avant les palais perses achéménides, qui ont largement repris la tradition assyrienne.

« Je conférai ainsi à tout ce palais la perfection qu'il convenait ; de son ensemble j'élevai le faîte afin de provoquer l'admiration de tous les peuples et lui donnai pour nom celui de "Palais sans rival" »

— Inscription de Sennacherib.
Cette longue expérience assyrienne culmine dans l'édifice qui s'élève au sud-ouest de Kuyunjik, le « Palais sans rival » (ÉGALZAGDINUTUKUA en sumérien, employé pour les noms cérémoniels) de Sennacherib, appelé aussi « Nouveau palais » (bītu eššu) dans les textes antiques, et dénommé « Palais sud-ouest » par Layard lors des fouilles. C'est un ouvrage massif érigé au rebord du tell, surplombant le cours du Khosr. Il était bâti sur des fondations d'une profondeur d'une vingtaine de mètres, et mesurait à l'aboutissement des travaux (qui se sont étalés entre 700 et 691) environ 500 mètres de long sur 200 mètres de large, selon les chiffres donnés par Sennacherib, problématiques puisqu'ils varient selon les versions de ses récits de construction (les plus tardifs prenant manifestement en compte des travaux d'extension). Ces données sont invérifiables dans la mesure où tout l'édifice n'a pas été dégagé par les archéologues (qui ont œuvré sur environ 200 m2), dont les techniques de fouilles, orientées vers la découverte de sculptures et objets, n'étaient du reste pas propres à assurer une bonne préservation et une bonne connaissance de l'organisation de l'édifice. La partie dégagée est organisée autour d'une vaste cour intérieure (cour XIX, 38,5 × 42,5 mètres) desservant des unités constituées de cours secondaires et de salles parallèles (peut-être des suites de réception) qui étaient décorées par des séries de bas-reliefs. Elle devait correspondre au secteur public (babānu) attesté dans les autres palais néo-assyriens. Une salle allongée (B dans la classification de Layard, I dans celle de Campbell-Thomson, approximativement 51 × 12,25 mètres), située dans la partie nord-est de la zone fouillée semble correspondre à la salle du trône, précédée par une autre salle allongée (G/V) qui ouvrait sur une grande cour de la partie publique, non dégagée. Au nord-ouest de la zone fouillée se trouvait un autre groupe de suites, autour d'une cour (LXIV) que des inscriptions semblent rattacher à Tashmetu-sharrat, épouse de Sennacherib. Vers l'est devaient se trouver les appartements royaux, dans un vaste espace non fouillé. L'édifice rejoignait peut-être un autre édifice fouillé environ 300 mètres plus au nord-est sur le bord du tell, le « palais oriental » ou bīt nakkapti. Le tout devait constituer un vaste ensemble s'étirant sur environ 500 mètres sur le rebord du tell comme l'indiquent les inscriptions royales, comprenant probablement plus de 200 salles et organisé autour de plusieurs grandes cours (une dans la zone fouillée, une ou deux dans celle qui ne l'a pas été), la partie non fouillée devant être moins large que celle qui l'a été (large de presque 200 mètres), ce qui correspondrait aux données des textes de Sennacherib.
Assurbanipal résida au début de son règne dans le palais de son grand-père, dont il fit restaurer certaines ailes, puis il s'est doté de son propre palais au nord-est de Kuyunjik, à l'angle opposé du palais sud-ouest, en réaménageant une ancienne construction précédant les rénovations de son grand-père Sennacherib, le bīt redutī (« Palais nord » selon la terminologie actuelle), édifice destiné à l'origine au successeur désigné au trône d'Assyrie et à son administration et déjà restauré par le refondateur de Ninive. Le plan de cet édifice est encore moins bien connu que celui du palais sud-ouest, notamment en raison de la forte érosion de cette partie du site. Il occupait au moins un espace au sol de 250 mètres de long sur 150 mètres de large. L'accès devait se faire par son côté est. Seules les pièces centrales ont été dégagées, comprenant une partie des salles d'audience, notamment la salle du trône (la salle M), située apparemment dans un groupe de quelques pièces à la jonction entre deux grandes cours intérieures.

Le décor des palais
De nombreuses salles des deux palais étaient décorées de grandes dalles de pierre sculptées, les orthostates, qui font partie des plus belles jamais réalisées par les Assyriens, dont beaucoup se trouvent de nos jours au British Museum et dont le succès ne s'est jamais démenti comme l'illustrent les nombreuses publications dont elles font l'objet. Selon les calculs de Layard, c'étaient en tout plus de 3 km de frises qui ornaient le seul palais de Sennacherib. Cette ampleur dépasse largement les précédents palais royaux, où seules quelques pièces étaient décorées de la sorte ; ici il s'agit de près de 70 pièces ornées de la sorte. Ces bas-reliefs commémoraient des hauts faits des règnes des souverains, surtout des campagnes victorieuses (35 des 38 groupes de reliefs identifiés), mais aussi la construction du palais lui-même. Des inscriptions les accompagnent, notamment des textes courts, les « épigraphes », qui les commentent et permettent de suivre l'histoire racontée par les reliefs, comme une sorte de bande dessinée.
Lorsqu'il explora le palais de Sennacherib, Layard fit sensation en exhumant dans la salle XXXVI des reliefs relatant le siège de Lakish entrepris par ce roi, événement dont on trouve un écho dans l'Ancien Testament.

Dans la cour VI, les bas-reliefs décrivent le processus de réalisation et de transport des fameux taureaux ailés qui gardent le palais : on effectue une première ébauche de la statue aux carrières de Balaṭai, puis on la transporte sur des rondins de bois tirés par des hommes, le tout sous le regard de Sennacherib lui-même, assis sur son trône ; la scène se répète sur plusieurs paysages (des marais, le bord d'une rivière), puis la série se termine par l'arrivée au palais (où des finitions sont sans doute effectuées). Cette représentation de scènes de construction et l'attention dans la représentation des paysages des scènes sculptées sont des innovations des artistes du règne de Sennacherib.

Quant à Assurbanipal, il fit réaliser dans la salle XXXIII du palais de son grand-père une série de bas-reliefs racontant sa victoire sur l'Élam et son roi Te-Umman près de la rivière Ulaï, puis l'intronisation d'un nouveau souverain à sa botte dans ce royaume, Ummanigash. En revanche les derniers affrontements de son règne contre l'Élam, qui se soldent par la prise de Suse, furent représentés sur les murs du palais nord. Des tablettes mises au jour à Ninive contiennent des textes courts, des épigraphes qui renvoient à des bas-reliefs retrouvés, notamment ceux relatifs à cette campagne élamite ; peut-être s'agissait-il de textes fournis aux lapicides afin de les graver sur les bas-reliefs. En tout cas leur lien avec les bas-reliefs semble évident en raison de correspondances, et ils permettent de reconstituer les scènes manquantes. Ils indiquent aussi que l'ensemble suivait un déroulement narratif grossièrement similaire à celui des annales du souverain consacré à la campagne élamite, mais en divergeait par endroits.

Une autre série de bas-reliefs du palais sud-ouest réalisée sous Assurbanipal pour décorer la salle XXVIII relate une campagne dans les régions marécageuses du sud de la Babylonie.

Dans son nouveau palais, le palais nord, Assurbanipal fit réaliser d'autres bas-reliefs, les plus caractéristiques étant ceux le montrant en train de chasser des lions et d'autres animaux sauvages, notamment des gazelles, des équidés, des lièvres, des oiseaux (surtout dans les salles C et S du palais). La série de bas-reliefs de la salle C, un long couloir, a été retrouvée dans un état de conservation remarquable. Un premier groupe d'orthostates réparti sur les murs au nord-est et au sud-est de la salle montre le déroulement d'une première chasse aux lions : des serviteurs préparent les armes et le char du roi, puis la scène se déplace sur une colline où se trouve un pavillon de chasse ; les lions sont apportés sur place dans des cages, puis relâchés, et le roi les combat depuis son char, entouré de ses gardes, et devant quelques spectateurs situés en retrait. Une autre composition occupait le mur sud-ouest de la salle, et est notamment remarquable par la description de l'agonie des félins, notamment une lionne criblée de flèches. Ces sculptures se caractérisent par les nombreux vides laissés dans la composition, ce qui est inhabituel de la part des artistes des palais assyriens. Elles mettent en avant la mise à mort des animaux par le souverain, vainqueur des forces de la nature sauvage et notamment de leur plus redoutable représentant.

D'autres éléments de décoration intérieure nous sont connus par l'archéologie et les textes. Ce sont d'abord les fameux taureaux androcéphales ailés sculptés en pierre caractéristiques des grands palais royaux assyriens, déjà été évoqués plus haut. Les textes de Sennacherib nous relatent aussi la réalisation de sculptures en métal de grande taille, réalisées avec une technique de type cire perdue : le palais était ainsi décoré d'un groupe de 8 lions de cuivre qui auraient pesé 11 400 talents chacun (soit environ 342 tonnes), et de 2 colonnes de bronze de 6 000 talents (180 tonnes).
Finalement, la construction des palais royaux de Ninive a mobilisé de nombreuses richesses, des plus courantes comme les briques d'argiles ou les pierres calcaires disponibles en Assyrie même, jusqu'aux ressources plus rares et précieuses comme les essences de bois de qualité et les métaux et pierres précieux qui étaient obtenus par le biais des tributs versés par les vassaux des rois assyriens. Il s'agit une nouvelle fois de montrer la puissance du souverain, et la construction d'un grand palais est un exploit tout comme les victoires militaires qui sont illustrées sur ses bas-reliefs.

La cour
Au-delà de leur intérêt architectural et artistique, les palais royaux de Ninive étaient conçus comme des centres de pouvoir destinés à commander le vaste empire assyrien à son apogée sous les trois derniers rois de la dynastie des Sargonides. Il est difficile d'y distinguer les deux espaces traditionnels des palais royaux assyriens, à savoir la zone privée (bītānu) où se trouvaient les appartements royaux et le harem, et la zone publique (bābānu) servant à l'administration palatiale et impériale. Le palais était le lieu de travail d'un grand nombre de domestiques, de scribes, mais aussi d'une foule de courtisans, d'eunuques, d'administrateurs, de prêtres, de gardes, dont le nombre a pu être évalué à 13 000 personnes pour le règne d'Assurbanipal. Le majordome (ša pān ekalli), aidé d'autres dignitaires, supervisait la gestion du palais royal, son approvisionnement et l'entretien des personnes qui s'y trouvaient. L'administration du royaume était aussi gérée depuis le palais. Les fonctions auliques n'étaient pas séparées strictement des fonctions administratives, puisqu'un personnage détenant une fonction qui à l'origine était une charge palatiale comme le grand échanson (rab šaqē) ou le chef cuisinier (rab nuhhatimi) étaient chargés d'une fonction administrative importante ou du gouvernement d'une province.
Le pouvoir était donc concentré entre les mains d'un groupe de personnes proches du roi mais qui dépendaient de la faveur de ce dernier. Cela pouvait amener la création de factions à l'intérieur du palais, pour accéder au roi et chercher à l'influencer, mais créait des tensions en raison des changements qui pouvaient survenir dans les faveurs royales. Les courtisans les plus privilégiés, nommés manzaz pāni (littéralement « celui qui se tient devant »), étaient admis à la plupart des audiences royales. Une étiquette rigide régissait la vie du palais et l'accès à la personne royale, à sa salle du trône où se déroulaient les réceptions d'ambassadeurs étrangers, de hauts dignitaires, de responsables locaux, qui devaient se prosterner devant le souverain lors de ces audiences.
Le harem était la zone réservée aux épouses du roi et aux filles de la famille royale non mariées, ainsi qu'aux enfants en bas âge. Elles étaient assistées par des servantes, des eunuques. Le harem était divisé en plusieurs maisons : une dirigée par la reine mère, dont l'influence peut être cruciale comme dans le cas de Zakutu, épouse de Sennacherib et reine mère au temps d'Assarhaddon et Assurbanipal ; celle de l'épouse principale ; celles des épouses secondaires importantes ; celles des sœurs du roi. Chacune de ces maisons disposait de son administration interne, de domaines fonciers générant des revenus. Il y a en plus bien d'autres femmes dépendant de la maisonnée du roi, notamment des musiciennes, et aussi des servantes, qui assurent leur fonctionnement. En pratique le harem d'un souverain n'étaient pas concentrés dans un seul palais, mais dans ses différents palais royaux, où étaient donc réparties les femmes de la maisonnée du roi.

Les tablettes
Les édifices du tell de Kuyunjik ont livré en tout plus de 30 000 tablettes et fragments, la plupart exhumés dès les premières campagnes de fouilles et datés de l'époque néo-assyrienne, même si quelques tablettes du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. ont été retrouvées. Certaines de ces découvertes, avant tout celle de la tablette relatant le récit du déluge de l'Épopée de Gilgamesh, traduite par George Smith en 1872, sont des faits marquants dépassant le cadre des études assyriologiques par leur retentissement. Une première partie du corpus est constituée de documents de la pratique, produits pour l'administration de l'empire assyrien ou pour des affaires privées de personnes généralement proches du pouvoir. Il s'agit de lettres, de documents juridiques enregistrant notamment des ventes de terres ou des prêts, des documents administratifs, quelques traités de paix, etc. Ces tablettes couvrent une longue période, dans la mesure où on y trouve même 1 200 lettres de la correspondance de Sargon II (722-705 av. J.-C.), bien qu'il ait régné depuis Dur-Sharrukin (elles ont probablement été déplacées à l’initiative de son successeur Sennacherib). Les documents les plus récents datent du règne de Sîn-shar-ishkun (625-612 av. J.-C.), donc juste avant la prise de la ville.
Une grande partie des textes de Ninive est de type littéraire, même s'il convient de préciser le sens de ce terme par un aperçu de leur contenu et le but de leur rassemblement dans la zone des palais royaux. L'ensemble de ces tablettes est souvent regroupé sous le terme de « bibliothèque d'Assurbanipal », ce souverain ayant été très actif dans la constitution de cette collection. Il ne s'agit en fait pas d'une seule et même bibliothèque. Bien que l'origine des textes soit mal recensée car on ne prenait pas la peine de répertorier les lieux de découverte ni les tablettes lors des premières campagnes de fouilles qui furent les plus fructueuses, il est possible d'identifier vaguement quelques importants groupes de textes : un premier dans le palais sud-ouest, et un deuxième dans le palais nord, les colophons des tablettes de ces collections mentionnant seulement leur appartenance au « palais d'Assurbanipal » ; et un troisième dans le temple de Nabû, dieu des lettres, certains textes révélant qu'il disposait d'un lot de tablettes qui est d'ailleurs le seul explicitement qualifié de « bibliothèque » (girginakku), mais n'a cependant pu être repérée par les fouilles.
Le but de ces bibliothèques n'était pas d'être des lieux de savoir pour le savoir, et ne traduisent pas une quelconque volonté encyclopédique de la part d'Assurbanipal, qui se présente souvent comme un souverain lettré dans ses inscriptions. Il s'agit en fait d'un ensemble de textes visant à assurer la protection du souverain : la grande majorité de ceux-ci sont de nature religieuse et rituelle, visant à défendre le roi contre les malheurs qui pourraient le toucher. Il a été évalué qu'il y avait environ 25 % de textes divinatoires, 20 % de tablettes de rituels, incantation et prières, et 20 % de listes lexicales. Les textes mythologiques ne sont qu'une très maigre portion du tout, marginale, à peine une quarantaine de tablettes. Pour constituer cette défense contre les forces surnaturelles, des confiscations de tablettes dans des bibliothèques de Babylonie ou même d'Assyrie furent ordonnées ; d'autres fois, les tablettes furent simplement copiées. Les lettrés responsables de ce corpus sont logiquement des prêtres, des devins ou des exorcistes.

Postérité
Le souvenir de Ninive
Ninive est mentionnée dans plusieurs textes dès l'Antiquité, qui ont été lus au cours des siècles postérieurs et ont préservé le souvenir de l'empire assyrien et de sa dernière capitale. Elle est évoquée par plusieurs écrivains grecs et romains qui s'en souvenaient comme de la capitale du grand empire assyrien, mais la décrivent peu en comparaison de Babylone, puis elle est tombée dans l'oubli et évoquée comme étant un champ de ruines par Lucien de Samosate. Il existe des confusions quant à sa localisation exacte : Ctésias de Cnide la confond avec Babylone en la situant sur l'Euphrate, les autres auteurs (Strabon, Pline l'Ancien, Ptolémée) la situent sur le Tigre mais tantôt sur la rive gauche, tantôt sur la rive droite, montrant le fait qu'ils sont souvent informés de façon imprécise. Les récits relatifs à Ninive chez les auteurs de l'Antiquité gréco-romaine reposent généralement sur ce qu'a rapporté Ctésias dans sa partie sur l'histoire de l'empire assyrien. Ninive devrait son nom à son fondateur, le souverain légendaire Ninos, premier roi assyrien et conquérant de nombreuses contrées. L'autre grand moment de l'histoire de la ville est sa destruction par les Mèdes et les Babyloniens qui poussent le tyran Sardanapale au suicide par l'incendie de son palais, après avoir pénétré dans la ville en provoquant une inondation. Ce récit repose apparemment sur une confusion entre la chute de Babylone en 648 av. J.-C. et celle de Ninive en 612 av. J.-C.
Dans la Bible hébraïque et chrétienne, Ninive est fondée par Nimrod. Les Assyriens ayant dominé les royaumes d'Israël et de Juda, son image y est négative. Les Livres de Nahum et de Sophonie prophétisent et décrivent sa destruction. Le Livre de Jonas est situé à Ninive : Jonas parvient à son grand dam à amener cette grande cité de pécheurs à faire pénitence. Ce texte ayant été rédigé bien après la chute de la ville, il ne contient aucune donnée historique fiable sur celle-ci. L'histoire de Jonas à Ninive connaît un grand succès, étant notamment reprise dans les Évangiles de Matthieu et Luc ; elle est devenue le texte auquel Ninive est le plus souvent associée dans la tradition juive, chrétienne puis musulmane. D'ailleurs, un lieu de culte dédié à Jonas fut érigé par une communauté chrétienne locale sur la colline qui reprit par la suite le nom du prophète, Nebi Yunus.
Plus proches du site, les auteurs arabes médiévaux mentionnent l'emplacement de l'antique Ninive. Les histoires qu'ils évoquent sur son passé sont reprises des auteurs grecs et surtout de la Bible, car pour eux cette ville est avant tout le lieu où Jonas (Yunus) est venu faire sa mission de conversion. L'emplacement de Ninive est bien connu par les géographes médiévaux (Ibn Hawqal et Al-Maqdisi par exemple), grâce à la mosquée qui s'élève sur l'actuel Nebi Yunus (alors appelé Tall al-Tawba, la « Colline du repentir »). Une légende locale rapporte que le gigantesque poisson qui aurait conduit Yunus sur place est enterré sur le site. Sur ces bases, quelques voyageurs européens médiévaux et modernes (Benjamin de Tudèle au XIIe siècle, Carsten Niebuhr au XVIIIe siècle) peuvent localiser les ruines de Ninive.

Réceptions modernes
Notes et références
Bibliographie
Généralités sur la Mésopotamie antique
Francis Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, Robert Laffont, coll. « Bouquins », 2001
Agnès Benoit, Art et archéologie : les civilisations du Proche-Orient ancien, Paris, RMN, coll. « Manuels de l'école du Louvre », 2003
Jean-Louis Huot, Jean-Paul Thalmann et Dominique Valbelle, Naissance des cités, Paris, Nathan, coll. « Origines », 1990 (ISBN 2-09-294150-X)
Dominique Charpin, Lire et écrire à Babylone, Paris, Presses Universitaires de France, 2008

Assyrie
Fastes des palais assyriens : Au nouvel empire, Dijon, coll. « Les dossiers d'archéologie n° 171 », mai 1992
(it) Frederick Mario Fales, L'impero assiro, storia e amministrazione (IX-VII secolo A.C.), Rome, Laterza, 2001
Francis Joannès, La Mésopotamie au Ier millénaire av. J.-C., Paris, Armand Colin, coll. « U », 2000
(en) Eckart Frahm (dir.), A Companion to Assyria, Malden, Wiley-Blackwell, 2017
(en) John M. Russell, « Assyrian Cities and Architecture », dans Eckart Frahm (dir.), A Companion to Assyria, Malden, Wiley-Blackwell, 2017, p. 423-452
(en) Gareth Brereton (dir.), I Am Ashurbanipal : King Of The World, King Of Assyria, Londres, Thames & Hudson et British Museum, 2018

Textes
Sylvie Lackenbacher, Le palais sans rival : Le récit de construction en Assyrie, Paris, La Découverte, 1990 (ISBN 2-7071-1972-5)
(en) A. Kirk Grayson et Jamie Novotny, The Royal Inscriptions of Sennacherib, King of Assyria (704–681 BC), Part 1, Winona Lake, Eisenbrauns, coll. « The Royal Inscription of the Neo-Assyrian Period » (no 3/1), 2012

Synthèses et articles sur Ninive
Nineveh: Papers of the XLIXe Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale: London, 7-11 July 2003, Iraq 66-67, Londres, 2004-2005 (ISSN 0021-0889)
(en) Julian Reade, « Ninive (Nineveh) », dans Reallexikon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. IX (5-6), Berlin, De Gruyter, 2000, p. 388-433
(en) Lucas P. Petit et Daniele Morandi Bonacossi (dir.), Nineveh, the Great City : Symbol of Beauty and Power, Leyde, Sidestone Press, coll. « Papers on Archaeology of the Leiden Museum », 2017
(en) Julian Reade, « Greco-Parthian Nineveh », Iraq 60,‎ 1998, p. 65-83
(en) John Malcolm Russell, Sennacherib's Palace Without Rival at Nineveh, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, 1991 (ISBN 0-226-73175-8)
Marguerite Rutten, Eugène Cavaignac et René Largement, « Ninive », Supplément au Dictionnaire de la Bible 6,‎ 1960, col. 480-505
(en) M. Louise Scott et John MacGinnis, « Notes on Nineveh », Iraq 52,‎ 1990, p. 63-73
(en) David Stronach, « Village to Metropolis: Nineveh and the Beginnings of Urbanism in Northern Mesopotamia », dans Stefania Mazzoni (dir.), Nuove Fondazioni nel Vicino Oriente Antico : Realtà e Ideologia, Pise, Giardini, 1994, p. 85-114
(en) David Stronach et Stephen Lumsden, « UC Berkeley's Excavations at Nineveh », The Biblical Archaeologist 55/4,‎ 1992, p. 227-233
(en) Tony J. Wilkinson, Jason Ur, Eleanor Barbanes Wilkinson et Mark Altaweel, « Landscape and Settlement in the Neo-Assyrian Empire », Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research, vol. 340,‎ 2005, p. 23-56
(en) Eckart Frahm, « The Great City: Nineveh in the Age of Sennacherib », Journal of the Canadian Society for Mesopotamian Studies, vol. 3,‎ 2008, p. 13-20 (lire en ligne)
(en) Eckart Frahm et al., « Nineveh », dans Encyclopedia of the Bible and Its Reception, vol. 21, Berlin et Boston, Walter de Gruyter, 2023, col. 501-532

Voir aussi
Articles connexes
Mossoul
Plaine de Ninive de Mossoul, de Sinjar
Liste des églises et monastères de Ninive (en)-Mossoul

Liens externes

Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste indicative du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

(en) « Kouyounjik / Nebi Yunis (ancient: Nineveh) », sur U.S. Department of Defense Legacy Resource Mangement Program (DoDLRMP)
(en) « Archaeological Site Photographs: Mesopotamia: Nineveh », sur Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago
(en) « Digital Nineveh Archives », sur University of California at Berkeley
(en) Karen Radner & Jamie Novotny, « Neo-Assyrian Archival Texts from Nineveh », sur Neo-Assyrian Archival Texts from Nineveh, The ATAE/Nineveh Project, a sub-project of MOCCI, 2021 (consulté le 22 février 2022).

 Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Mésopotamie   Portail de l’Irak


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 2,422
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Nineveh
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Mosul (Arabic: الموصل‎ al-Mawṣil, Maṣlawī Arabic: al-Mōṣul, Assyrian: ܢܝܢܘܐ  Ninaweh, Kurdish: Mosul/Ninawa, Turkish: Musul) is a city in Iraq's Northwestern region, and is the country's second largest city by population. Its religious makeup is one of the most diverse in the country.

## Understand
Mosul is Iraq's second largest city and the major economic hub in northern Iraq. Located along the fertile lands of river Tigris the city's history dates back to at least 6,000 BC. On the eastern banks lies the ancient city of Nineveh, which was the world's largest city around 700 BC. Mosul has since thrived under different rulers, empowered by its strategic position and fertile lands.
In recent history Mosul is mainly known for being the last stand of the Islamic State (ISIS). The fierce battle which took place during 2017 left large parts of the old city in ruins. While much of the city's heritage is destroyed, Maslawis are slowly rebuilding the city.

## By bus
From Baghdad: shared taxis are available from Allawi North garage in Baghdad. Cost is 25,000 IQD for a seat (likely 5,000 IQD extra for the front seat); the driver will usually cram in 4 passengers before leaving. The journey takes 4-5 hours.
From Erbil: shared taxis are available at 10,000 IQD per seat. Journey takes 2-3 hours.
36.33857143.1369331 Garage Baghdad. Garage where shared taxis to/from Baghdad depart and arrive.    (updated Oct 2022)
36.3508543.172522 Mosul North Garage. Garage for northbound shared taxi departures, i.e. Erbil.    (updated Oct 2022)

## By train
As of 2023 there's no rail service to Mosul, rehabilitation is however ongoing and the government has promised to bring back passenger trains from Baghdad.
36.331443.12223 Mosul railway station (محطة قطار الموصل).     (updated Jun 2023)

## By air
As of 2023, the airport is closed and not expected to reopen within the next few years. The nearest international airport is in Erbil, 75 km east of Mosul.
36.29538943.1480564 Mosul International Airport (OSM  IATA). Closed as of 2021.      (updated Feb 2020)

## Get around
Travelling by car is the safest option for getting around in the city. Several bridges over the river Tigris have now been repaired, making the east-west journey much easier.
There's no public transport system within the city, apart from mini buses and shared taxis. Extensive knowledge of Arabic is needed to use these.

## See
Mosul was rich in old historical places and ancient buildings: mosques, castles, churches, monasteries, synagogues, and schools, many of which have architectural features and decorative work of significance. The town centre was dominated by a maze of streets and attractive 19th-century houses. There were old houses here of beauty. Markets were particularly interesting for the mixture of people who jostle there, such as Arabs, Kurds, Assyrians, Turcoman, Armenians, Yazidi, Mandeans, Roma and Shabaks. Mosul also had a sizable Jewish population.

## Mosques and shrines
Mosul is a treasure trove for those interested in historic Islamic religious architecture with dozens of mosques dating back hundreds of years. However many are in a state of disrepair or damaged by the war. Also some mosques might be off limit to visit for non-Muslims.
36.34298943.1269291 Great Mosque of al-Nuri (جامع النوري). Tradition holds that Nur ad-Din Zangi, a Turkoman atabeg of the Great Seljuk Empire and sultan of its Syrian province, built the mosque in 1172–1173, shortly before his death. the remarkably elaborate brickwork 52-m high minaret that leans like the Tower of Pisa, called Al-Hadba ("the hunchback"). It was destroyed during the last days of the Battle of Mosul in 2017. As of 2020, reconstruction efforts are ongoing.      (updated Feb 2020)
36.34027943.1405912 Mujahidi Mosque. Dates back to 12th century AD, and is distinguished for its shen dome and elaborately wrought mihrab. Large parts of it was destroyed by ISIS in 2015.      (updated Mar 2019)
36.35757943.1417043 Mosul Grand Mosque (جامع الموصل الكبير). A modern mosque still under construction on the right side of Tigris.      (updated Jan 2020)
36.35455243.1227044 Mausoleum of Yahya Abu al-Qasim. On the right bank of the Tigris, known for its conical dome, decorative brickwork and calligraphy engraved in Mosul blue marble, built in the 13th century. Largely destroyed by ISIS in 2014.      (updated Jan 2020)
36.34828143.1598725 Mosque of the Prophet Yunus. A site with a shared Jewish, Christian and Islamic heritage, this is the supposed burial place of Prophet Jonah. Located on a prominent mound just south of the Nineveh, the site formerly housed both the palace of King Esarhaddon (681-669 BCE) and an Assyrian church. However, a mosque was constructed on the site in the 12th century. The mosque was largely destroyed by ISIS in 2014, but parts of it remain.    (updated Feb 2020)
36.339643.12866 Al-Raabiya Mosque. Built in 1766 with an impressive decorated dome. The site was damaged during the war but it being rebuild in 2021.  (updated Jun 2021)

## Churches and monasteries
Mosul had the largest proportion of Assyrian Christians of all the Iraqi cities, and contains several interesting old churches, some of which originally date back to the early centuries of Christianity. Its ancient Assyrian churches are often hidden and their entrances in thick walls are not easy to find. Many churches were partly or completely destroyed by ISIS during their rule and as of 2020 many are in ruins. Also, dotted around Mosul are ancient monasteries, some in ruins while others are still active.
36.33801743.1259947 Shamoun Al-Safa (St. Peter, Mar Petros). Oldest church in Mosul, it dates from the 13th century and named after Shamoun Al-Safa or St. Peter. Early, it had the name of the two Apostles, Peter and Paul, and had early been inhabited by the nuns of the Sacred Hearts.    (updated Nov 2020)
36.34141143.1253548 Church of St. Thomas (Mar Touma). One of the oldest historical churches, named after St. Thomas the Apostle who preached the Gospel in the East, including India.      (updated May 2018)
36.34055643.1272229 Our Lady of the Hour Church (كنيسة اللاتين). Also known as the Latin Church by locals. Built in the 1870s with an impressive clock tower, this large Latin church was partially destroyed by ISIS in 2015. The church has however been faithfully restored to much of its former glory.   (updated Jan 2022)
36.34455643.13263910 Al-Tahera Church. A Syriac Catholic church completed in 1862, it was severely damaged in 2017 but has since then been restored. The church was built on top the Ancient al-Tahera Church, dating back to the 7th century but last reconstructed in 1743. The old church can still be visited, located three metres below ground level   (updated Nov 2020)
36.33858643.12563911 Mart Meskinta Chaldean Church. Chaldean Catholic church dating back to the 12th century, latest major remodeling was in 1851.   (updated Jan 2024)
Mar Petion Church. Mar Petion, educated by his cousin in a monastery, was martyred in 446 AD. It is the first Chaldean Catholic church in Mosul, after the union of many Assyrians with Rome in the 17th century. It dates back to the 10th century, and lies 3 m below street level. This church suffered destruction, and it has been reconstructed many times. (updated Jan 2020)
Mar Hudeni Church. Named after Mar Ahudemmeh (Hudeni) Maphrian of Tikrit who martyred in 575 AD. Mar Hudeni is an old church of the Tikritans in Mosul. It dates back to the 10th century, lies 7 metres below street and was first reconstructed in 1970. People can get mineral water from the well in its yard. The chain, fixed in the wall, is thought to cure epileptics. (updated Jan 2020)
36.409743.119712 St. George's Monastery (Mar Gurguis). One of the oldest churches in Mosul, named after St. George, was probably built late in the 17th century. Pilgrims from different parts of the North visit it yearly in the spring, when many people also go out to its whereabouts on holiday. It is about 6 metres below street. A modern church was built over the old one in 1931, abolishing much of its archeological significance. The only monuments left are a marble door-frame decorated with a carved Estrangelo (Syriac) inscription, and two niches, which date back to the 13th or 14th century.   (updated Jan 2022)
36.340143.126413 Anglican Church. One of very few Anglican churches in Iraq. Badly damaged during the war but has since been rebuilt. Parts of the intricate ornaments remains.    (updated Jan 2024)
36.4943.44277814 Mar Mattai Monastery. Famous monastery is situated about 20 km east of Mosul on the top of a high mountain (Mount Maqloub). It was built by Mar Matte, a monk who fled with several other monks in 362 AD from the Monastery of Zuknin near the City of Amid (Diyarbakir) in the southern part of Asia Minor (modern Turkey) and the north of Iraq during the reign of Emperor Julian the Apostate (361–363 AD). It has a precious library containing Syrianic scriptures.   (updated Jan 2020)
36.13777843.40638915 Monastery of Mar Behnam. Also called Deir Al-Jubb (the Cistern Monastery) and built in the 12th or 13th century, it lies in the Nineveh Plain near Nimrud about 32 kilometres southwest of Mosul. The monastery, a great fort-like building, rises next to the tomb of Mar Behnam, a prince who was killed by the Sassanians, perhaps during the 4th century AD.   (updated Jan 2020)
36.29258643.13108516 Monastery of Saint Elijah (Dair Mar Elia). Ruins of the oldest Christian Monastery in Iraq, it dates from the 6th century. Severely damaged by ISIS in 2014.      (updated Jan 2020)

## Other sites
36.3378543.13958617 Mosul Museum. Used to contain many interesting finds from the ancient sites of the old Assyrian capital cities Nineveh and Nimrud. Some of the collection was spared destruction and the museum reopened in late 2020.      (updated May 2018)
36.35531443.1215918 Bash Tapia Castle. Mosul's old walls have disappeared, these imposing ruins rose high over the Tigris until they were largely destroyed by ISIS in 2016.      (updated Nov 2018)
36.352843.125719 Qara Serai (Black Palace). Remnants of the 13th century palace of Sultan Badruddin Lu'lu'.   (updated Jan 2020)
36.349343.117420 Barood Khana. Built in 1843 as the headquarters of the Ottoman military.  (updated Jun 2021)
36.341643.130821 Beit al-Tutunji (قصر مصطفى اغا التوتنجي). An early nineteenth-century historic house in that represents a fine example of Ottoman vernacular architecture, the house was badly damaged during the ISIS occupation but is being rehabilitated as of late 2021. It is expected to reopen as a museum and cultural center.      (updated Nov 2021)
36.340943.111522 Mosul War Cemetery. British war cemetery, with victims from both World Wars buried here.    (updated Jan 2024)

## Nineveh
Just across the river and ever closer to expanding Mosul were the great ruins of Nineveh, an ancient Assyrian city and the capital of the Neo-Assyrian Empire. Once the largest city in the world and covering an area of some 750 ha, it was besieged, destroyed and left unpopulated after the 612 BC battle of Nineveh. There have been repeated archaeological projects and some half-finished attempts at reconstructions, but unfortunately the site suffers from rapid decay due to lack of protection from the elements, vandalism and looting. Large parts of the site, including its walls, was sacked by ISIS in 2016.
36.358243.152423 Kuyunjik Mound. Ruin mound that rises about 20 metres above the surrounding plain of the ancient city. Today, there is little evidence of these old excavations other than weathered pits and earth piles.    (updated Jul 2021)
Nebi Yunus. Second ruin mound at Nineveh (updated Jan 2020)
The ruins of Nineveh were surrounded by the remains of a massive stone and mudbrick wall dating from about 700 BC.
36.36145243.1465524 Mashki Gate (ماشکی دروازه). Also known as Gate of the Water Carriers, this gate was perhaps used to take livestock to water from the River Tigris which now flows about 1.5 km to the west. It has been reconstructed in fortified mudbrick to the height of the top of the vaulted passageway.    (updated Jan 2020)
36.371343.147825 Nergal Gate. Named for the god Nergal, it may have been used for some ceremonial purpose, as it is the only known gate flanked by stone sculptures of winged bull-men (lamassu). It was reconstructed in the mid-20th century.     (updated Jan 2020)
36.374743.154526 Adad Gate. Named after the god Adad.    (updated Jan 2020)
36.350843.175527 Shamash Gate. named after the god Shamash, It is the only gate with such a significant projection. The mound of its remains towers above the surrounding terrain. Its size and design suggest it was the most important gate in Neo-Assyrian times. The mudbrick reconstruction in 1960s has deteriorated significantly.    (updated Jan 2020)
36.343243.17728 Halzi Gate.    (updated Jan 2020)

## Do
36.344243.14481 Spring Theater (مسرح الربيع). Partly restored in 2021, this theater and music venue is home to several performances.    (updated Apr 2021)
36.343143.12532 Baytna (مؤسسة بيتنا). Housed in a historic house, this cultural centre houses exhibitions and live concerts.    (updated Jul 2021)
36.374243.12013 Mosul Forest. Established as a nursery to produce seeds in the early 1950s, this urban forest is a popular for picknicks and hiking. The park was severely damaged during the ISIS occupation, but are recovering.    (updated Jan 2023)

## Eat
A number of restaurants, mainly on the eastern side of the city, have reopened.

## Drink
Alcohol is not widely available but in the aftermath of the liberation from Daesh a handful of bars have reopened.

## Sleep
As of early 2020, major hotels chains have yet to reopen in Mosul, but there is a limited number of smaller hotels. The landmark Nineveh International Hotel was completely ruined in 2017.
36.37720543.1150691 Al Habda Tourist Hotel (فندق الحدباء السياحي في الموصل), ☏ +964 770 453 9305. Resort-style hotel along the river Tigris.    (updated May 2018)
36.3602343.1427652 Al Sultan Palace Hotel (فندق قصر السلطان), ☏ +964 770 006 6027. One of few hotels that is open near the city centre.    (updated Jan 2020)
36.3390343.138343 Al Safir Hotel (فندق السفير), ☏ +964 772 900 9299 (WhatsApp). Hotel near the old city. 25K IQD per night as of October 2022. Fairly basic rooms with small bathrooms (squat toilet, no separate shower) but comfortable beds. At least one of the front desk staff speaks English, but some of them don't. Bookable via WhatsApp.    (updated Oct 2022)

## Nimrud
Former 3,000-year-old Assyrian Empire city first excavated in the 1840s as an archaeological site on the eastern bank of the Tigris, 30 km (20 miles) south of Mosul. Overrun by ISIL (Daesh) in 2014, historic sites destroyed in 2015. The Iraqi Army reclaimed Nimrud in 2016.  The site contained the palace of Ashurnasirpal, the king of Assyria. Many of the artefacts are in the British Museum, London, the Metropolitan Museum in New York City or Iraq’s national museum in Baghdad.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SAMARRA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:34:40


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,599
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samarra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Samarra (Arabic: سَامَرَّاء, Sāmarrāʾ) is a city in Iraq. It stands on the east bank of the Tigris in the Saladin Governorate, 125 kilometers (78 mi) north of Baghdad. The modern city of Samarra was founded in 836 by the Abbasid caliph al-Mu'tasim as a new administrative capital and military base. In 2003 the city had an estimated population of 348,700. During the Iraqi Civil War (2006–08), Samarra was in the "Sunni Triangle" of resistance.
The archeological site of Samarra still retains much of the historic city's original plan, architecture and artistic relics. In 2007, UNESCO designated it a World Heritage Site.

History
Prehistoric Samarra
The remains of prehistoric Samarra were first excavated between 1911 and 1914 by the German archaeologist Ernst Herzfeld and Friedrich Sarre. Samarra became the type site for the Samarra culture. Since 1946, the notebooks, letters, unpublished excavation reports and photographs have been in the Freer Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C.
The civilization flourished alongside the Ubaid period, as one of the first town states in the Near East. It lasted from 5,500 BCE and eventually collapsed in 3,900 BCE.

Neo-Assyrian period
A city of Sur-marrati (refounded by Sennacherib in 690 BC according to a stele in the Walters Art Museum) is insecurely identified with a fortified Assyrian site at al-Huwaysh on the Tigris opposite modern Samarra. The State Archives of Assyria Online identifies Surimarrat as the modern site of Samarra.
Ancient place names for Samarra noted by the Samarra Archaeological Survey are Greek Souma (Ptolemy V.19, Zosimus III, 30), Latin Sumere, a fort mentioned during the retreat of the army of Julian in 363 AD (Ammianus Marcellinus XXV, 6, 4), and Syriac Sumra (Hoffmann, Auszüge, 188; Michael the Syrian, III, 88), described as a village.
The possibility of a larger population was offered by the opening of the Qatul al-Kisrawi, the northern extension of the Nahrawan Canal which drew water from the Tigris in the region of Samarra, attributed by Yaqut al-Hamawi (Muʿjam, see under "Qatul") to Khosrau I (531–578). To celebrate the completion of this project, a commemorative tower (modern Burj al-Qa'im) was built at the southern inlet south of Samarra, and a palace with a "paradise" or walled hunting park was constructed at the northern inlet (modern Nahr ar-Rasasi) near ad-Dawr.  A supplementary canal, the Qatul Abi al-Jund, excavated by the Abbasid Caliph Harun al-Rashid, was commemorated by a planned city laid out in the form of a regular octagon (modern Husn al-Qadisiyya), called al-Mubarak and abandoned unfinished in 796.

Abbasid capital
In 836 CE, the Abbasid Caliph Al-Mu'tasim founded a new capital at the banks of the Tigris. Here he built extensive palace complexes surrounded by garrison settlements for his guards, mostly drawn from Central Asia and Iran (most famously the Turks, as well as the Iranian Khurasani Ishtakhaniyya, Faraghina and Ushrusaniyya regiments) or North Africa (like the Maghariba). Although quite often called Mamluk slave soldiers, their status was quite elevated; some of their commanders bore Sogdian titles of nobility.

The city was further developed under Caliph al-Mutawakkil, who sponsored the construction of lavish palace complexes, such as al-Mutawakkiliyya, and the Great Mosque of Samarra with its famous spiral minaret or Malwiya, built-in 847. For his son al-Mu'tazz he built the large palace Bulkuwara.

The Nestorian patriarch Sargis (860–72) moved the patriarchal seat of the Church of the East from Baghdad to Samarra, and one or two of his immediate successors may also have sat in Samarra so as to be close to the seat of power.
Samarra remained the residence of the caliph until 892, when al-Mu'tadid returned the capital to Baghdad. Historical sources report that the city was looted around this time. Its population probably decreased and the city declined, but it remained an important market center.
From the tenth century onward it turned into an important pilgrimage site. During the 12th and 13th centuries, the river's course to the south of the city shifted further east. As a result, the main road between Baghdad and Mosul was moved to the west bank and Samarra lost its importance as a trading town.

Modern era
In the eighteenth century, one of the most violent battles of the 1730–1735 Ottoman–Persian War, the Battle of Samarra, took place, where over 50,000 Turks and Persians became casualties. The engagement decided the fate of Ottoman Iraq and kept it under Istanbul's suzerainty until the First World War.
During the 1950s, Samarra gained new importance when a permanent lake, Lake Tharthar, was created through the construction of the Samarra Barrage, which was built in order to prevent the frequent flooding of Baghdad. Many local people were displaced by the dam, resulting in an increase in Samarra's population.

Samarra is a key city in Saladin Governorate, a major part of the so-called Sunni Triangle where insurgents were active during the Iraq War. Though Samarra is famous for its Shi'i holy sites, including the tombs of several Shi'i Imams, the town was traditionally and until very recently, dominated by Sunni Arabs. Tensions arose between Sunnis and the Shi'a during the Iraq War. On February 22, 2006, the golden dome of the al-Askari Mosque was bombed by Al-Qaeda in Iraq, setting off a period of rioting and reprisal attacks across the country which claimed hundreds of lives. No organization claimed responsibility for the bombing. On June 13, 2007, Sunni insurgents attacked the mosque again and destroyed the two minarets that flanked the dome's ruins. On July 12, 2007, the clock tower was blown up. No fatalities were reported. Shiʿi cleric Muqtada al-Sadr called for peaceful demonstrations and three days of mourning. He stated that he believed no Sunni Arab could have been behind the attack, though according to the New York Times the attackers were probably Sunni militants linked to Al-Qaeda. The mosque compound was closed after the 2006 bombing and a indefinite curfew was placed on the city by the Iraqi police at the time. In 2009, the mosque reopened while restoration was ongoing.
Ever since the end of Iraqi civil war in 2007, the Shia population of the holy city has increased exponentially. However, violence has continued, with bombings taking place in 2011 and 2013. In June 2014, the city was attacked by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) as part of their Northern Iraq offensive.  ISIL forces captured the municipality building and university, but were later repulsed by the Iraqi army and SWAT forces after capturing the city and holding it for two days. The nearby Imam Dur Mausoleum, a historic mausoleum dedicated to Muslim ibn Quraysh, a Shi'i ruler, was destroyed by ISIL in 2014.

Geography
Climate
Samarra has a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification BWh). Most rain falls in the winter. The average annual temperature in Samarra  is 22.7 °C (72.9 °F). About 171 mm (6.73 in) of precipitation falls annually.

Religious significance
The city is also home to al-Askari Shrine, containing the mausolea of the Imams Ali al-Hadi and Hasan al-Askari, the tenth and eleventh Shiʿi Imams, respectively. This has made it an important pilgrimage centre for the Imami Shias. In addition, Hakimah and Narjis, female relatives of the Prophet Muhammad and the Imams, held in high esteem by Muslims, are buried there, making this mosque one of the most significant sites of worship.

Sports
Samarra is home to the Samarra SC, that plays in the second highest division of the Iraqi football league system, namely Iraqi Premier Division League. Its ground is the Samarra Stadium.

In popular culture
The metaphor of "Having an appointment in Samarra", signifying death, is a literary reference to an ancient Babylonian myth recorded in the Babylonian Talmud and transcribed by W. Somerset Maugham, in which Death narrates a man's futile attempt to escape him by fleeing from Baghdad to Samarra.  The story "The Appointment in Samarra" subsequently formed the germ of a novel of the same name by John O'Hara. The original story was retold in verse by F. L. Lucas in his poem "The Destined Hour" in From Many Times and Lands (1953).
In the 1968 film Targets, Byron Orlok, an aging horror film star played by Boris Karloff, tells Maugham's version of the story to his younger colleagues.
The story is told in "The Six Thatchers", a 2017 episode of Sherlock.

Notable people
Ahmed Abdul Ghafoor, former head of the Sunni Endowment Office with the rank of Minister.
Ahmed Hassan Al-Taha, the most senior scholar of the Sunni sect in Iraq, university professor, Imam and preacher at the Abu Hanifa Mosque and member of the Supreme Council of the Iraqi Jurisprudence Assembly of Senior Scholars for Preaching and Fatwa.
Saleh al-Badri (1893-1943), poet

See also
List of places in Iraq

References
Selected bibliography
De la Vaissière, Étienne (2007): Samarcande et Samarra. Élites d’Asie central dans l’empire abbaside (Studia Iranica, Cahier 35), Paris.
Gordon, Matthew S. (2001). The Breaking of a Thousand Swords: A History of the Turkish Military of Samarra (A.H. 200–275/815–889 C.E.). Albany, New York: State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-7914-4795-2.
Northedge, Alastair (2005): The historical topography of Samarra, London.
Robinson, Chase (ed.) (2001): A Medieval Islamic City Reconsidered: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Samarra (Oxford Studies in Islamic Art 14). Oxford.

External links

Ernst Herzfeld Papers, Series 7: Records of Samarra Expeditions, 1906–1945 Smithsonian Institution, Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery Archives, Washington, D.C.
Ernst Herzfeld Papers, Series 7: Records of Samarra Expeditions, 1906–1945 Collections Search Center, S.I.R.I.S., Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Iraq Image - Samarra Satellite Observation
Samarra Archaeological Survey
"The Appointment in Samarra"
Destruction of Askari Mosque
Samarra on Google Earth


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 610
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samarra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sāmarrā est une ville d'Irak. Son nom est l'abréviation de l'arabe signifiant « celui qui l'aperçoit est heureux », nom que lui avait donné le calife abbasside Al-Mutasim. Elle se situe sur la rive est du Tigre dans la province de Salah ad-Din, à 125 km au nord de Bagdad et, en 2002, sa population comptait 201 700 habitants.

Historique
Sāmarrā était autrefois l'une des plus grandes villes de Mésopotamie. La ville pré-islamique a été remplacée par une nouvelle ville en 833 par le calife abbasside Al-Mutasim, afin d'y installer ses mercenaires turcs recrutés la même année lors de son accession au califat. Écartée de Bagdad où elle molestait la population locale, la nouvelle garde du calife y vécut en véritable micro-société et Samarra devint alors la nouvelle capitale du monde musulman. Durant le règne de son successeur Al-Wathiq et davantage sous celui du calife Al-Mutawakkil, Sāmarrā se transforme en une ville commerciale. Ce dernier a été le garant de la construction de la Grande Mosquée de Sāmarrā en 847 avec son célèbre minaret en spirale. Il conçoit également des parcs et un palais pour son fils Al-Mu`tazz. Sous le règne d'Al-Mutamid, le califat retourne à Bagdad afin de fuir les exactions de la garde turque ayant assassiné Al-Mutawakkil en 861. Sāmarrā connaît alors un déclin prolongé, qui s'accélère après le XIIIe siècle quand le cours du Tigre change.
C'est en 944 que fut construite la célèbre Mosquée d'Or, autre nom du mausolée d'Ali al-Hadi et de Hasan al-Askari, respectivement le dixième et le onzième Imams chiites, tout comme la châsse de Muhammad al-Mahdi, connu comme l'« Imam caché », qui fut le douzième et dernier Imam chiite pour les Imamis. De ce fait, Sāmarrā est devenue un important lieu de pèlerinage pour les musulmans chiites duodécimains.
Pendant le XXe siècle, Sāmarrā gagne en importance quand un lac est formé près de la ville, grâce à un barrage sur le fleuve qui est construit dans le but de mettre fin aux fréquentes inondations de Bagdad. Beaucoup d'habitants ont été déplacés lors de la construction du barrage, ce qui a fortement augmenté la population de Sāmarrā.

L'invasion américaine
À la suite de l'invasion américaine de l'Irak en 2003, Sāmarrā connaît de nombreux attentats entre communautés sunnite et chiite. La ville est le théâtre de combats urbains du 1er au 4 octobre 2004, lorsque les Américains et les forces gouvernementales irakiennes lancent un assaut pour la reprendre à la suite de sa prise par des insurgés islamistes.
Le 22 février 2006, le dôme de la Mosquée d'Or est détruit par un premier attentat.
Le 13 juin 2007, un second attentat cause l'effondrement de ses deux minarets.

L'État islamique
En juin 2014, la ville est le lieu de combats lorsque les troupes de l'État islamique en Irak et au Levant envahissent la région.

Personnalités
Al-Moubarred (826-898) y exerça son activité de grammairien vers 860 ;
Abū Bakr al-Shiblī (861-946), y serait né.

Notes et références
Annexes
Articles connexes
Abbassides
Grande Mosquée de Samarra
Sanctuaire Al-Askari

Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online 
Ernst Herzfeld Papers, Records of Samarra Expeditions Collections Search Center, S.I.R.I.S, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Ernst Herzfeld Papers, Series 7: Records of Samarra Expeditions, 1906-1945 Freer Gallery of art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery Archives, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Inventaire des Archives Ernst Herzfeld Freer Gallery of art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery Archives, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

 Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de l’Irak   Portail du patrimoine mondial   Portail de la Mésopotamie   Portail du haut Moyen Âge


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 603
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Samarra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Samarra (Arabic:سامَرّاء‎) is a city in Iraq's Baghdad Belts. In 2007, UNESCO named Samarra one of its World Heritage Sites.

## Understand
The region has been inhabited since prehistoric times and has given name to the Late Neolithic Samarra culture, which existed roughly between 5500 and 4800 BCE. The city of Sur-marrati was founded in 690 BC on the opposite bank of the Tigris. Since then the city has been destroyed and rebuilt several times and slightly different locations along the Tigris river.
Samarra in its current iteration was founded in 836 CE by the Abbasid Caliph Al-Mu'tasim. He and his successors built lavish palace complexes; such as al-Mutawakkiliyya, the Great Mosque of Samarra with its famous spiral minaret and the large palace Bulkuwara. Samarra remained the residence of the caliph until 892, when it returned to Baghdad. The city then declined and was largely abandoned starting in 940 CE. During the next millennia the city remained insignificant, but population increased during the 1950s when the Samarra Barrage was built and flooded nearby areas.
Today, Samarra is a city of about 350,000 inhabitants. Being the only remaining Islamic capital that retains its original plan, architecture and artistic relics it was named a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2007.

## Climate
Samarra has a hot desert climate. Daily highs in June and July easily reach 45 °C (113 °F).

## By road
Highway 1 between Baghdad and Mosul passes by Samarra. The road is in acceptable condition, but robberies along the route have been frequent in the late 2010s.

## By rail
National operator Iraqi Railways runs a passenger train from Baghdad once per week, on Fridays.
34.188643.8521 Samarra railway station (Western side of the river Tigris).    (updated Nov 2020)

## See
34.20583343.8797221 Great Mosque of Samarra (مسجد سامراء الكبير). Ninth-century mosque that was commissioned in 848 and completed in 851 by the Abbasid caliph Al-Mutawakkil who reigned (in Samarra) from 847 until 861. Was at one time the largest mosque in the world; its minaret, the Malwiya Tower, is a vast spiralling cone 52 m high and 33 m wide with a spiral ramp. The art and architecture of the mosque was influential; stucco carvings within the mosque in floral and geometric designs represent early Islamic decoration.      (updated Jan 2018)
34.1987843.873382 Al-Askari Shrine (مرقد الامامين علي الهادي والحسن العسكري, Marqad al-Imāmayn ‘Alī l-Hādī wa l-Ħassan al-‘Askarī). Contains the mausoleums of the 'Ali al-Hadi and Hasan al-Askari, the tenth and eleventh Shia Imams, respectively, as well as the shrine of Muhammad al-Mahdi, known as the "Hidden Imam", who is the twelfth and final Imam of the Shia of the Ja'farī Madhhab. This has made it an important pilgrimage centre for Ja'farī Shia Muslims. In addition, Hakimah Khatun and Narjis Khatun, female relatives of the Prophet Mohammed and the Shia Imams, held in high esteem by Shia and Sunni Muslims, are buried there, making this mosque one of the most significant sites of worship for Shia and a venerated location for Sunni Muslims.      (updated Jan 2018)
33.588306-7.6113893 Qasr al-'Ashiq (قصر العاشق). A historical palace dates back to the Abbasid era, commissioned under the 15th Abbasid caliph Al-Mu'tamid. Construction took place during 877–882 and the palace is a prominent surviving example of the Abbasid architectural style.   (updated Oct 2020)
34.3608143.801874 Abu Dulaf Mosque (15 kilometres north of Samarra). Historic mosques commissioned by the 10th Abbasid Caliph Al-Mutawakkil in 859.   (updated Nov 2020)
34.243.8666675 Belquara Palace (قصر بلكوارا).  (updated Jan 2023)
34.23157443.8733256 Al-Barakah Palace (قصر البركة).  (updated Mar 2023)

## Stay safe
See the warning on the Iraq article for information on the security situation.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
GREAT MOSQUE OF SAMARRA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: historical_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:34:49


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,543
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Mosque_of_Samarra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Great Mosque of Samarra or Al-Malwiya Mosque (Arabic: جَامِع سَامَرَّاء ٱلْكَبِيْر; Arabic: مَسْجِد سَامَرَّاء ٱلْكَبِيْر; Arabic: ٱلْمَسْجِد ٱلْجَامِع فِي سَامَرَّاء, lit. 'The Congregational Mosque in Samarra' or Arabic: جامع الملوية, romanized: Jāmi‘ Al-Malwiyya, lit. 'Mosque of the Spiral one'.) is a former congregational mosque, now in partial ruins, in Samarra, in the Saladin Governorate of Iraq. The mosque was commissioned in 848 CE and completed in 851 by the Abbasid caliph Al-Mutawakkil. At the time of construction, it was the world's largest mosque. It is known for its 52-metre-high (171 ft) minaret encircled by a spiral ramp. The former mosque is within the 15,058-hectare (37,210-acre) Samarra Archaeological City UNESCO World Heritage Site, listed in 2007.

History
For a time, the mosque was the largest in the world; its minaret, the Malwiya Tower, is a spiralling cone 52 metres (171 ft) high and 33 metres (108 ft) wide with a spiral ramp. 

The reign of Al-Mutawakkil (r. 847–861) had a great effect on the appearance of the city, for he seemed to have been a lover of architecture, and the one responsible for building the Great Mosque of Samarra. Al-Mutawakkil and his hired workers as well as other people from the area constructed this mosque using baked brick octagon piers that included four marble columns in the corners. The marble columns were imported, which draws on the fact that Al-Mutawakkil hired artists and architects from all over the Abbasid empire to help him construct the Great Mosque. In a list of his building projects which appears in several different versions, the new congregational mosque and up to twenty palaces are mentioned, totalling between 258 and 294 million dirhams. The new congregational mosque, with its spiral minaret, built between 234 AH (848/849 CE) and 236 AH (850/851CE), formed part of an extension of the city to the east, extending into the old hunting park.
The mosque had 17 aisles, and its walls were paneled with mosaics of dark blue glass. It was part of an extension of Samarra eastwards. The art and architecture of the mosque were influential; stucco carvings within the mosque in floral and geometric designs represent early Islamic decoration. The Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo, Egypt, was based on the Samarra Mosque in many regards and similarly stands in a large open space.
At the time of construction, another major feature of Samarra was the inlets of the great Nahrawan canal. This provided flood plains for a rich agricultural centre. Small and medium-sized game were also hunted in the area. This encompassed the main area of the city that held Islamic structures like the main palace and subsidiary palaces of the Waziri and the Umari as well as a large number of houses in a residential area. The Great Mosque was built right outside this main area and became a staple for the people of Samarra as well as visitors and foreigners. This project, along with others by Al-Mutawakkil, transformed the city of Samarra from a medium-sized centre into the enormous city seen today.
The mind behind the mosque, Al-Mutawakkil, was assassinated in 861, and structures like this mosque were then difficult to credit to a subsequent caliph. There was unrest and a ten-year period of trouble, including a civil war in 865–866. This Great Mosque was one of the last buildings with a known name attributed to it in this period.
The mosque was destroyed in 656 AH (1258/1259CE), after Hulagu Khan's invasion of Iraq.

Modern conservation
Only the mosque's outer wall and its minaret have been preserved. The Iraqi State Organization of Antiquities have been working closely with historians and architects in a restoration process starting in 1956. They tasked people to restore various monuments in Samarra including the Great Mosque. There was extensive restoration done to both the courtyard of the mosque as well as the spiral minaret. Previously, only 6 steps remained in the minaret and very few complete arches surrounded the courtyard.
The minaret sustained further damage in 2005, when its top was destroyed by an explosion. According to some sources, Iraqi insurgents were responsible for the attack, following the tower's use as a sniper position by US forces. In 2015, UNESCO and the Iraqi government announced a project to restore the minaret and assess damages to the rest of the Samarra archeological site, which was made a World Heritage Site in 2007.

Architecture
Layout
The mosque's main structure is encompassed by a baked brick wall on the outer edge including forty-four semi-circular towers supporting the structure. The outer wall includes twenty-eight windows. Twenty-four of them are facing the southeastern side, the qiblah. There is one window for each aisle, excluding the mihrab site. The building has a total of sixteen doors that provide access. The interior of the mosque presents a large courtyard surrounded by covered aisles on all sides. The prayer hall featured a large mihrab framed as an arch. There was a fountain in the center of the courtyard that was covered and decorated in marble tile and mosaics. This fountain was believed to be carved from one large stone (called a kasat al-fir'awn or, the Pharaoh's Cup) and carried to this area by elephants. It was constructed by caliph al-Wathiq. The traditional mosque courtyard was square, however, the Great Mosque of Samarra portrayed a rectangular courtyard surrounded by these two layers of walls. It is known by historians and architects for the walls of the mosque to be covered in glazed or glass panels. These would be in the traditional blues, whites, and golds used in many other mosques. Fragments of these panels have been found by archaeologists working on the mosques. The interior of the mosque has ceilings with a height of 11 meters with a total of 464 pillars supporting this baked brick ceiling. For the most part the interior is plain and the focus was a strong foundation set by a continuous brick slab holding together these pillars.

Minaret
The Malwiya Tower (Arabic: ٱلْمِنَارَة ٱلْمَلْوِيَّة, romanized: Al-Minārat al-Malwiyyah, lit. 'The Twisted Minaret', or 'The Snail Shell Minaret') was originally connected to the mosque by a bridge. The minaret or tower was constructed in 848–852 of sandstone, and is unique among other minarets because of its ascending spiral conical design. 52 metres (171 ft) high and 33 metres (108 ft) wide at the base, the spiral contains stairs reaching to the top.
The height of the Malwiyyah made it practical to be used for the adhan (call to prayer). It is visible from a considerable distance in the area around Samarra and therefore may have been designed as a strong visual statement of the presence of Islam in the Tigris Valley.
The minaret's unique spiral design is said by some to be derived from the architecture of the Mesopotamian ziggurats. This design, completed under al-Mutawakkil, was unlike other minarets created in this time or anything else seen in the Islamic world because of its base's shape. The Mesopotamian Ziggurats had a square base while this minaret and others built like it in Iraq have a circular base with a twisted spiral leading up to the top. Some consider the influence of the Pillar of Gor, which was also square not circular, built in the Sasanian Empire, more prominent. This style of spiraling minaret was then repeated by the caliph Abu Dulaf for his mosque (also in Samarra). These minarets become a focal point of the skyline in any city and are a call to attention and prayer. These earlier theories which proposed that these helicoidal minarets were inspired by ancient Mesopotamian ziggurats has been challenged and rejected by some modern scholars including Richard Ettinghausen, Oleg Grabar, and Jonathan Bloom.
The minaret's spiral shape inspired Pritzker Architecture Prize winner Philip Johnson's design for the 1976 Chapel of Thanksgiving at Thanks-Giving Square in Dallas, Texas, in the United States. The minarets of a prominent Emirati mosque, that of Sheikh Khalifa in Al Ain, have been also been inspired by this minaret. The influence of the minaret and courtyard of the mosque is seen in these places, as well as in modern mosques.

Gallery
See also
Islam in Iraq
List of mosques in Iraq
Chogha Zanbil
Firuzabad, Fars
List of tallest structures built before the 20th century
The Wonderful Barn

References
Further reading
Necipoğlu, G., ed. (2008). Muqarnas, Volume 25 Frontiers of Islamic Art and Architecture: Essays in Celebration of Oleg Grabar's Eightieth Birthday. doi:10.1163/ej.9789004173279.i-396. ISBN 9789004173279.
"Great Mosque of Samarra'". www.globalsecurity.org. Retrieved December 9, 2019.
"Iraq Significant Site 060 - Samarra — Al-Mutawakkil Mosque & Minaret al-Malwiya". www.cemml.colostate.edu. Archived from the original on December 9, 2019. Retrieved December 9, 2019.

External links

"The Great Mosque, Samarra, Iraq". islamicity.com.
"Samarra Archaeological City". World Heritage Site. UNESCO. 2019.
"Photo of The Great Mosque". oi.uchicago.edu. Archived from the original on May 6, 2006.
"Photo and information". gallery.sjsu.edu. Archived from the original on October 28, 2005.
"Photos, floor plans, and information". dur.ac.uk.
"Ernst Herzfeld Papers, Series 7: Records of Samarra Expeditions, Great Mosque of al-Mutawakkil". Collections Search Center, S.I.R.I.S. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on July 24, 2009.
"Ernst Herzfeld Papers, Series 7: Records of Samarra Expeditions, 1906-1945". Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery Archives.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
CTESIPHON
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:35:06


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,566
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ctesiphon
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ctesiphon ( TESS-if-on; Middle Persian: 𐭲𐭩𐭮𐭯𐭥𐭭, Tyspwn or Tysfwn; Persian: تیسفون; Ancient Greek: Κτησιφῶν, Attic Greek: [ktɛːsipʰɔ̂ːn]; Syriac: ܩܛܝܣܦܘܢ) was an ancient city in modern Iraq, on the eastern bank of the Tigris, about 35 kilometres (22 mi) southeast of Baghdad. Ctesiphon served as a royal capital of the Iranian empires for over eight hundred years, in the Parthian and Sasanian periods. Ctesiphon was the administrative capital of the Sasanian Empire from 226–637 until the Muslim conquest of Persia in 651 AD.
Ctesiphon developed into a rich commercial metropolis, merging with the surrounding cities along both shores of the river, including the Hellenistic city of Seleucia. Ctesiphon and its environs were therefore sometimes referred to as "The Cities" (Mahuza, Arabic: المدائن, romanized: al-Mada'in). In the late 6th and early 7th century, it was listed as the largest city in the world by some accounts.
During the Roman–Parthian Wars, Ctesiphon fell three times to the Romans, and later fell once during Sasanian rule. It was also the site of the Battle of Ctesiphon in 363 AD. After the Muslim invasion and conquest, the city fell into decline and was depopulated by the end of the 8th century, its place as a political and economic center being taken by Baghdad, the Abbasid capital. The most conspicuous structure remaining today is the Taq Kasra, sometimes called the Archway of Ctesiphon.

Names
The Latin name Ctesiphon derives from Ancient Greek Ktēsiphôn (Κτησιφῶν). This is ostensibly a Greek toponym based on a personal name, although it may be a Hellenized form of a local name, reconstructed as Tisfōn or Tisbōn. In Iranian-language texts of the Sasanian era, it is spelled as Tyspwn, which can be read as Tīsfōn, Tēsifōn, etc. in Manichaean Parthian, in Middle Persian 𐭲𐭩𐭮𐭯𐭥𐭭 and in Christian Sogdian (in Syriac alphabet) languages. The New Persian form is Tisfun (تیسفون).
Texts from the Church of the East's synods referred to the city as Qṭēspōn (Classical Syriac: ܩܛܝܣܦܘܢ) or some times Māḥôzē (Classical Syriac: ܡܚܘܙ̈ܐ) when referring to the metropolis of Seleucia-Ctesiphon.
In modern Arabic, the name is usually Ṭaysafūn (طيسفون) or Qaṭaysfūn (قطيسفون) or as al-Mada'in (المدائن "The Cities", referring to Greater Ctesiphon). "According to Yāqūt [...], quoting Ḥamza, the original form was Ṭūsfūn or Tūsfūn, which was arabicized as Ṭaysafūn." The Armenian name of the city was Tizbon (Տիզբոն). Ctesiphon is first mentioned in the Book of Ezra of the Old Testament as Kasfia/Casphia (a derivative of the ethnic name Cas, and a cognate of Caspian and Qazvin). It is also mentioned in the Talmud as Aktisfon. In another Talmudic reference it is written as Akistfon, located across the Tigris River from the city of Ardashir.

Location
Ctesiphon is located approximately at Al-Mada'in, 35 km (22 mi) southeast of the modern city of Baghdad, Iraq, along the river Tigris. Ctesiphon measured 30 square kilometers, more than twice the surface of a 13.7-square-kilometer fourth-century imperial Rome.
The archway of Chosroes (Taq Kasra) was once a part of the royal palace in Ctesiphon and is estimated to date between the 3rd and 6th centuries AD. It is located in what is now the Iraqi town of Salman Pak.

History
Parthian period
Ctesiphon was founded in the late 120s BC. It was built on the site of a military camp established across from Seleucia by Mithridates I of Parthia. The reign of Gotarzes I saw Ctesiphon reach a peak as a political and commercial center. The city became the Empire's capital circa 58 BC during the reign of Orodes II. Gradually, the city merged with the old Hellenistic capital of Seleucia and other nearby settlements to form a cosmopolitan metropolis.
The reason for this westward relocation of the capital could have been in part due to the proximity of the previous capitals (Mithradatkirt, and Hecatompylos at Hyrcania) to the Scythian incursions.
Strabo abundantly describes the foundation of Ctesiphon:

In ancient times Babylon was the metropolis of Assyria; but now Seleucia is the metropolis, I mean the Seleucia on the Tigris, as it is called. Nearby is situated a village called Ctesiphon, a large village. This village the kings of the Parthians were wont to make their winter residence, thus sparing the Seleucians, in order that the Seleucians might not be oppressed by having the Scythian folk or soldiery quartered amongst them. Because of the Parthian power, therefore, Ctesiphon is a city rather than a village; its size is such that it lodges a great number of people, and it has been equipped with buildings by the Parthians themselves; and it has been provided by the Parthians with wares for sale and with the arts that are pleasing to the Parthians; for the Parthian kings are accustomed to spend the winter there because of the salubrity of the air, but they summer at Ecbatana and in Hyrcania because of the prevalence of their ancient renown.
Because of its importance, Ctesiphon was a major military objective for the leaders of the Roman Empire in their eastern wars. The city was captured by Rome four or five times in its history – three times in the 2nd century alone. The emperor Trajan captured Ctesiphon in 116, but his successor, Hadrian, decided to willingly return Ctesiphon in 117 as part of a peace settlement. The Roman general Avidius Cassius captured Ctesiphon in 164 during another Parthian war, but abandoned it when peace was concluded. In 197, the emperor Septimius Severus sacked Ctesiphon and carried off thousands of its inhabitants, whom he sold into slavery.

Sasanian period
By 226, Ctesiphon was in the hands of the Sasanian Empire, who also made it their capital and had laid an end to the Parthian dynasty of Iran. Ctesiphon was greatly enlarged and flourished during their rule, thus turning into a metropolis, which was known by in Arabic as al-Mada'in, and in Aramaic as Mahoze. The oldest inhabited places of Ctesiphon were on its eastern side, which in Islamic Arabic sources is called "the Old City" (مدينة العتيقة Madīnah al-'Atīqah), where the residence of the Sasanians, known as the White Palace (قصر الأبيض), was located. The southern side of Ctesiphon was known as Asbānbar or Aspānbar, which was known by its prominent halls, riches, games, stables, and baths. Taq Kasra was located in the latter.
The western side was known as Veh-Ardashir (meaning "the good city of Ardashir" in Middle Persian), known as Mahoza by the Jews, Kokhe by the Christians, and Behrasir by the Arabs. Veh-Ardashir was populated by many wealthy Jews, and was the seat of the church of the Nestorian patriarch. To the south of Veh-Ardashir was Valashabad. Ctesiphon had several other districts which were named Hanbu Shapur, Darzanidan, Veh Jondiu-Khosrow, Nawinabad and Kardakadh.
Severus Alexander advanced towards Ctesiphon in 233, but as corroborated by Herodian, his armies suffered a humiliating defeat against Ardashir I. In 283, emperor Carus sacked the city uncontested during a period of civil upheaval. Some historians have claimed that Galerius marched on Ctesiphon and was able to capture it. However, this is never explicitly stated in any source and is still a matter of debate among scholars.
Hence that he returned it to the Persian king Narses in exchange for Armenia and western Mesopotamia is also likely to have never happened. In c. 325 and again in 410, the city, or the Greek colony directly across the river, was the site of church councils for the Church of the East.

After the conquest of Antioch in 541, Khosrow I built a new city near Ctesiphon for the inhabitants he captured. He called this new city Veh-Antiok-Xusrō, or literally, "better than Antioch Khosrow built this". Local inhabitants of the area called the new city Rumagan, meaning "town of the Romans" and Arabs called the city al-Rumiyya. Along with Weh Antiok, Khosrow built a number of fortified cities. After a campaign in 573, John of Ephesus wrote that no fewer than 292,000 persons had been deported from Dara, Apamia, and other Syrian towns to Veh-Antiokh. John would later cite a letter stating no more than 30,000 prisoners were deported. It's thought that the first number he gave is not to be taken literally.
In 590, a member of the House of Mihran, Bahram Chobin repelled the newly ascended Sasanian ruler Khosrow II from Iraq, and conquered the region. One year later, Khosrow II, with aid from the Byzantine Empire, reconquered his domains. During his reign, some of the great fame of al-Mada'in decreased, due to the popularity of Khosrow's new winter residence, Dastagerd. In 627, the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius surrounded the city, the capital of the Sassanid Empire, leaving it after the Persians accepted his peace terms. In 628, a deadly plague hit Ctesiphon, al-Mada'in and the rest of the western part of the Sasanian Empire, which even killed Khosrow's son and successor, Kavad II.
In 629, Ctesiphon was briefly under the control of Mihranid usurper Shahrbaraz, but the latter was shortly assassinated by the supporters of Khosrow II's daughter Borandukht. Ctesiphon then continued to be involved in constant fighting between two factions of the Sasanian Empire, the Pahlav (Parthian) faction under the House of Ispahbudhan and the Parsig (Persian) faction under Piruz Khosrow.

Downfall of the Sasanians and the Islamic conquests
In the mid-630s, the Muslim Arabs, who had invaded the territories of the Sasanian Empire, defeated them during a great battle known as the Battle of al-Qādisiyyah. The Arabs then attacked Ctesiphon, and occupied it in early 637.
The Muslim military officer Sa`d ibn Abi Waqqas quickly seized Valashabad and made a peace treaty with the inhabitants of Veh-Antiok-Xusrō and Veh-Ardashir. The terms of the treaty were that the inhabitants of Veh-Antiok-Xusrō were allowed to leave if they wanted to, but if they did not, they were forced to acknowledge Muslim authority, and also pay tribute (jizya). Later on, when the Muslims arrived at Ctesiphon, it was completely desolated, due to flight of the Sasanian royal family, nobles, and troops. However, the Muslims had managed to take some of troops captive, and many riches were seized from the Sasanian treasury and were given to the Muslim troops. Furthermore, the throne hall in Taq Kasra was briefly used as a mosque.
Still, as political and economic fortune had passed elsewhere, the city went into a rapid decline, especially after the founding of the Abbasid capital at Baghdad in the 760s, and soon became a ghost town. Caliph Al-Mansur took much of the required material for the construction of Baghdad from the ruins of Ctesiphon. He also attempted to demolish the palace and reuse its bricks for his own palace, but he desisted only when the undertaking proved too vast. Al-Mansur also used the al-Rumiya town as the Abbasid capital city for a few months.
It is believed to be the basis for the city of Isbanir in One Thousand and One Nights.

Modern era
The ruins of Ctesiphon were the site of a major battle of World War I in November 1915. The Ottoman Empire defeated troops of Britain attempting to capture Baghdad, and drove them back some 40 miles (64 km) before trapping the British force and compelling it to surrender.

Population and religion
Under Sasanian rule, the population of Ctesiphon was heavily mixed: it included Arameans, Persians, Greeks and Assyrians. Several religions were also practiced in the metropolis, which included Christianity, Judaism and Zoroastrianism. In 497, the first Nestorian patriarch Mar Babai I, fixed his see at Seleucia-Ctesiphon, supervising their mission east, with the Merv metropolis as pivot. The population also included Manicheans, a dualist church, who continued to be mentioned in Ctesiphon during Umayyad rule fixing their "patriarchate of Babylon" there. Much of the population fled from Ctesiphon after the Arab capture of the metropolis. However, a portion of Persians remained there, and some important figures of these people are known to have provided Ali with presents, which he, however, refused to take. In the ninth century, the surviving Manicheans fled and displaced their patriarchate up the Silk Road, in Samarkand.

Archaeology
A German Oriental Society expedition led by Oscar Reuther excavated at Ctesiphon in 1928–29 mainly at Qasr bint al-Qadi on the western part of the site. In winter of 1931–1932 a joint expedition of the German State Museums (Staatliche Museen zu Berlin) and The Metropolitan Museum of Art continued excavations at the site, focusing on the areas of Ma'aridh, Tell Dheheb, the Taq-i Kisra, Selman Pak and Umm ez-Za'tir under the direction of Ernst Kühnel.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, an Italian team from the University of Turin directed by Antonio Invernizzi and Giorgio Gullini worked at the part of the site on the other side of the Tigris, which they identified as Veh Ardashir. Work mainly concentrated on restoration at the palace of Khosrow II. In 2013, the Iraqi government contracted to restore the Taq Kasra, as a tourist attraction.

Gallery
See also
List of cities of the ancient Near East
Opis
Achaemenid Empire
Rachae
Sasanian Empire
School of Seleucia-Ctesiphon

References
Bibliography
M. Streck, Die alte Landschaft Babylonien nach den arabischen Geographen, 2 vols. (Leiden, 1900–1901).
M. Streck, "Seleucia und Ktesiphon," Der Alte Orient, 16 (1917), 1–64.
A. Invernizzi, "Ten Years Research in the al-Madain Area, Seleucia and Ctesiphon," Sumer, 32, (1976), 167–175.
Luise Abramowski, "Der Bischof von Seleukia-Ktesiphon als Katholikos und Patriarch der Kirche des Ostens," in Dmitrij Bumazhnov u. Hans R. Seeliger (hg), Syrien im 1.-7. Jahrhundert nach Christus. Akten der 1. Tübinger Tagung zum Christlichen Orient (15.-16. Juni 2007). (Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck, 2011) (Studien und Texte zu Antike und Christentum / Studies and Texts in Antiquity and Christianity, 62),
Morony, Michael (2009). "MADĀʾEN". Encyclopaedia Iranica.
Kennedy, Hugh N. (2004). The Prophet and the Age of the Caliphates: The Islamic Near East from the 6th to the 11th Century (Second ed.). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 0-582-40525-4.
Amedroz, Henry F.; Margoliouth, David S., eds. (1921). The Eclipse of the 'Abbasid Caliphate. Original Chronicles of the Fourth Islamic Century, Vol. V: The concluding portion of The Experiences of Nations by Miskawaihi, Vol. II: Reigns of Muttaqi, Mustakfi, Muti and Ta'i. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Rekaya, M. (1991). "al-Maʾmūn". The Encyclopedia of Islam, New Edition, Volume VI: Mahk–Mid. Leiden and New York: BRILL. pp. 331–339. ISBN 90-04-08112-7.
Kennedy, Hugh N. (2004). The Prophet and the Age of the Caliphates: The Islamic Near East from the 6th to the 11th Century (Second ed.). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Ltd. ISBN 0-582-40525-4.
Zarrinkub, Abd al-Husain (1975). "The Arab conquest of Iran and its aftermath". The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume 4: From the Arab Invasion to the Saljuqs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–57. ISBN 978-0-521-20093-6.
Bosworth, C. E. (1975). "Iran under the Buyids". In Frye, R. N. (ed.). The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume 4: From the Arab Invasion to the Saljuqs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 250–305. ISBN 0-521-20093-8.
Kröger, Jens (1993). "CTESIPHON". Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. IV, Fasc. 4. pp. 446–448.
Shapur Shahbazi, A. (2005). "SASANIAN DYNASTY". Encyclopaedia Iranica, Online Edition. Retrieved 30 March 2014.
Dignas, Beate; Winter, Engelbert (2007). Rome and Persia in Late Antiquity. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 2 May 2023.

Further reading
Daryaee, Touraj (2022). "The Bones of Khosrow: The Sacred Topography of Ctesiphon". Electrum. 29: 267–284. doi:10.4467/20800909EL.22.018.15788. S2CID 253169197.

External links

Ctesiphon and Taq Kasra photo gallery
Ctesiphon Exhibition by the Islamic Art Museum at the Pergamon Museum in Berlin in 2016 (Video)
Ctesiphon (profile at the Metropolitan Museum of Art)


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 1,116
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%B7%D9%8A%D8%B3%D9%81%D9%88%D9%86
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

المدائن أو طيسفون وأصلها طوسفون وتعرف كذلك باسم قطيسفون أو طسيفون (بالآرامية: ܩܛܝܣܦܘܢ) (باليونانية: Κτησιφῶν) (بالفارسية: تيسفون) أو المدائن؛ مدينة عراقية بناها الإغريق قبل الميلاد وورثها الفرس، والتي بَقَت مركزًا رئيسيًا للبلاد حتى حلت محلها بغداد في القرن الثامن. وكانت عاصمة الساسانيين والفرثيين. بنيت المدينة على الضفة الشرقية لنهر دجلة قرب بلدة المدائن/سلمان باك الحالية ما يقارب ال35 كم جنوب شرق بغداد. يقع موقع طيسفون قرب موقع مدينة سلوقية الأثرية التي بناها السلوقيون. من أشهر معالم طيسفون بناء طاق كسرى أو إيوان كسرى الذي كان مقر الحكم الساساني.

الموقع
تقع مدينة طسيفون في منطقة المدائن تقريبًا، على بُعد 35 كيلومترًا (22 ميلًا) جنوب شرق مدينة بغداد الحديثة في العراق، على ضفاف نهر دجلة. بلغت مساحتها 30 كيلومترًا مربعًا، أي أكثر من ضعف مساحة روما الإمبراطورية في القرن الرابع الميلادي التي بلغت مساحتها 13.7 كيلومترًا مربعًا.
كان إيوان كسرى (طاق كسرى) جزءًا من القصر الملكي في طسيفون ويُقدّر تاريخه بين القرنين الثالث والسادس الميلاديين. ويقع فيما يُعرف اليوم بمدينة سلمان باك العراقية.

تاريخ
الفترة البارثية
تأسست طسيفون في أواخر القرن الثاني عشر قبل الميلاد. وبُنيت على موقع مخيّمٍ عسكري أقامه مهرداد الأول ملك بارثيا قبالة سلوقية. وبلغت ذروة مجدها كمركز سياسي وتجاري في عهد غوتارزيس الأول. غدت المدينة عاصمة الإمبراطورية نحو عام 58 قبل الميلاد في عهد أورود الثاني. واندمجت تدريجيًا مع العاصمة الهلنستية القديمة سلوقية، وغيرها من المستوطنات المجاورة لتشكل مدينة عالمية متعددة الثقافات.
يرجع السبب جزئيًا في نقل العاصمة غربًا، إلى قرب العواصم السابقة (نسا، وقومس في هيركانيا) من غزوات السكوثيين ربما.

يصف إسطرابون تأسيس طسيفون على نحوٍ مفصل:«كانت بابل عاصمة آشور في العصور القديمة؛ أما الآن فهي سلوقية، وأعني سلوقية على نهر دجلة، كما تُسمى. وتقع بالقرب منها قرية تُدعى طسيفون، وهي قريةٌ كبيرة. اعتاد الملوك البارثيون جعل هذه القرية مقر إقامتهم الشتوي، ليستبقوا على السلوقيين حتى لا يُضطهدوا نتيجة إيوائهم الشعب أو الجنود السكوثيين بينهم. وبسبب قوة البارثيين، باتت طسيفون مدينة أكثر منها قرية؛ فحجمها كبير لدرجة أنها تؤوي عددًا كبيرًا من السكان، وقد جهزها البارثيون أنفسهم بالمباني؛ وزودوها بالبضائع للتجارة، وبالفنون التي تُرضي البارثيين. إذ اعتاد الملوك منهم قضاء الشتاء هناك بسبب الهواء الصحي، لكنهم كانوا يقضون الصيف في إكباتانا وهيركانيا بسبب سيادتهم القديمة في تلك المناطق».كانت طسيفون هدفًا عسكريًا رئيسًا لقادة الإمبراطورية الرومانية في حروبهم الشرقية نظرًا لأهميتها. واستولت روما على المدينة أربع أو خمس مرات في تاريخها، ثلاث منها في القرن الثاني. واستولى الإمبراطور تراجان عليها في عام 116، لكن خليفته هادريان قرر إعادتها طواعيةً في عام 117 كجزء من تسوية سلميّة. واستولى الجنرال الروماني أفيديوس كاسيوس على طسيفون في عام 164 خلال حرب بارثية أخرى هي الحرب الرومانية الفرثية (161-166)، لكنه تخلى عنها عند إبرام السلام. وفي عام 197، نهب الإمبراطور سيبتيموس سيفيروس طسيفون وأسر آلافًا من سكانها وباعهم كعبيد.

الفترة الساسانية
كانت طسيفون مع حلول عام 226، في قبضة الإمبراطورية الساسانية التي اتخذتها أيضًا عاصمة لها، وأنهت حكم سلالة البارثيين في إيران. توسعت المدينة وازدهرت على نحو كبير خلال حكمهم، وتحولت إلى عاصمة عُرفت بالعربية باسم «المدائن»، وبالآرامية باسم «ماهوزا». كانت أقدم الأماكن المأهولة في طسيفون تقع على جانبها الشرقي الذي يُطلق عليه في المصادر العربية الإسلامية «المدينة العتيقة»، حيث كان مقر إقامة الساسانيين المعروف بالقصر الأبيض. أما الجانب الجنوبي من المدينة، فعُرف باسم أسبانبار الذي اشتهر بقاعاته الفخمة وثرواته وألعابه وإسطبلاته وحماماته. وكان يقع في هذا الأخير قصر طاق كسرى.
عُرف الجانب الغربي باسم «فيه-أردشير» (ويعني «مدينة أردشير الطيبة» باللغة البهلولية)، وعرفها اليهود باسم «ماهوزا»، والمسيحيون باسم «كوخه»، والعرب باسم «بهراسير». كانت «فيه-أردشير» مأهولة بعديدٍ من اليهود الأثرياء، وكانت مقر كنيسة البطريرك النسطوري. وإلى الجنوب من «فيه-أردشير» كانت تقع «فالشاباد». وكانت طسيفون تضم عدة مقاطعات أخرى سُميت «هانبو شابور»، و«درزانيدان»، و«وه جونديو خسرو»، و«ناوين آباد»، و«كارداقاد».
تقدمّ سيفيروس ألكسندر نحو طسيفون في عام 233، ولكن كما أكد هيروديان، مُنيت جيوشه بهزيمة مُذلة أمام أردشير الأول. وفي عام 283، نهب الإمبراطور ماركوس أوريليوس كاروس المدينة من دون مُنازع خلال فترة من الاضطرابات المدنية. زعم بعض المؤرخين أن غاليريوس زحف نحو طسيفون وتمكن من الاستيلاء عليها. لكن ذلك لم يُذكر صراحةً ولا في أي مصدر، ولا يزال موضع جدل بين الباحثين.
لذا، فمن المرجح أيضًا أن إعادتها للملك الفارسي نرسي بن هرمز مقابل أرمينيا وغرب بلاد ما بين النهرين، لم يحدث قط. كانت المدينة أو المستعمرة اليونانية الواقعة مباشرة عبر النهر، موقعًا لمجالس كنسية تابعة لكنيسة المشرق، وذلك نحو عام 325، ومرة أخرى نحو عام 410.
بعد فتح أنطاكية في عام 541، بنى كسرى الأول مدينة جديدة قرب طسيفون لسكانها الذين أسرهم. أطلق على هذه المدينة الجديدة اسم «فيه-أنطاكية-كسرو»، أو حرفيًا «أفضل من أنطاكية ومن بناء خسرو». أطلق سكان المنطقة المحليون على المدينة الجديدة اسم روماغان، أي «مدينة الرومان»، بينما أطلق عليها العرب اسم الرومية. إلى جانب «فيه-أنطاكية»، بنى كسرى عددًا من المدن المحصنة. وكتب يوحنا الأفسسي بعد حملة عام 573 أن ما لا يقل عن 292 ألف شخص قد رُحِّلوا من دارا وأفاميا ومدن سريانية أخرى إلى «فيه-أنطاكية». واستشهد يوحنا لاحقًا برسالة تفيد بأن عدد الأسرى الذين رُحِّلوا لم يتجاوز 30 ألفًا. ويُعتقد أن الرقم الأول الذي ذكره لا يُؤخذ بحرفيته.
دحر بهرام جوبين، أحد أفراد أسرة مهران، في عام 590، الحاكم الساساني الصاعد حديثًا، كسرى الثاني من العراق، واستولى على المنطقة. وبعد عام واحد، استعاد كسرى الثاني ممتلكاته، بمساعدة الإمبراطورية البيزنطية. تراجعت شهرة المدائن على نحوٍ كبير خلال فترة حكمه، بسبب شعبية مقر إقامة كسرى الشتوي الجديد، داستاغرد. وفي عام 627، حاصر الإمبراطور البيزنطي هرقل المدينة، عاصمة الإمبراطورية الساسانية، وتركها بعد أن قَبِل الفرس شروط السلام الخاصة به. وفي عام 628، أصاب وباء مميت طسيفون والمدائن وبقية الجزء الغربي من الإمبراطورية الساسانية، ما أودى بحياة ابن كسرى وخليفته، قباد الثاني.
ظلت طسيفون لفترة وجيزة تحت سيطرة المغتصب المهراني شهربراز في عام 629، وبعد أن اغتيل الأخير على يد أنصار بوران دخت، ابنة كسرى الثاني، واصلت طسيفون انخراطها في القتال المستمر بين فصيلين من الإمبراطورية الساسانية هما، فصيل بهلاف (الفرثي) تحت حكم أسرة إسباهبودان والفصيل البارسيج (الفارسي) تحت قيادة بيروز خسرو.

بعد الفتح الإسلامي
عندما سقطت العاصمة الفارسية طيسفون الواقعة في مقاطعة خفرفان (المعروفة اليوم بالعراق) على يد المُسلمين خلال الفتح الإسلامي للعراق في عام 637 تحت القيادة العسكرية لسعد بن أبي وقاص خلال خلافة عمر بن الخطاب تم حرق قصورها ومحفوظاتها. وفقًا لمحمد بن جرير الطبري في كتابه تاريخ الطبري، كتب القائد العربي سعد بن أبي وقاص إلى الخليفة عمر بن الخطّاب يسأل فيه عما ينبغي فعله بالكتب في رسالته. وكان رد عمر: إذا كانت الكتب تتناقض مع القرآن، فهي تجديف. من ناحية أخرى، إذا كانت متفقة معها، فليس هناك حاجة لها، لأن القرآن كافٍ لنا. وتم تدمير مكتبة ضخمة وتم حرق عشرات الكتب، وهي نتاج لأجيال من العلماء والباحثين الفرس، وتم أسر ما يقرب من 40,000 من النبلاء الفرس وتم بيعهم لاحقًا كعبيد في الجزيرة العربية. أقام العرب المسلمون مدينة المدائن على أنقاض مدينتي طيسفون وسلوقية، حيث دفن الصحابي سلمان الفارسي في المدائن. وقد استخدم أبو جعفر المنصور بعضًا من حجارة طيسفون والمدائن في بناء بغداد.

أعلام
كسرى الأول
كسرى الثاني
ماني
ابن أبي الحديد
هرمز الرابع

معرض صور
انظر أيضًا
إيوان المدائن


== مراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 712
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ct%C3%A9siphon
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ctésiphon est une ancienne ville parthe, située face à Séleucie du Tigre, sur la rive gauche du Tigre, à 30 km au sud-est de la ville actuelle de Bagdad, en Irak.
La ville s'étendait sur 30 km2. Son seul vestige resté visible est la grande arche Taq-e Kisra (en persan : tāq-i kisrā, طاق کسری, « l'iwan de Khosro Ier ») au sud-est de la ville actuelle de Salman Pak (en).

Histoire
Elle est fondée par les Parthes dont les rois en font leur résidence d'hiver : 
« Tout près de Séleucie est un gros bourg, appelé Ctésiphon, dont les rois parthes, par égard pour les Séleuciens, avaient fait leur résidence d'hiver : ils avaient voulu épargner à Séleucie l'ennui de loger à perpétuité ces bandes de Scythes et toute cette soldatesque qu'ils traînaient à leur suite. Mais le développement de l'empire parthe a profité à Ctésiphon, qui, de la condition de simple bourg, s'est élevée aujourd'hui au rang de ville, tant par l'extension de son enceinte dans laquelle toute cette multitude tient à l'aise, que par le nombre des constructions dont ses nouveaux hôtes l'ont ornée, et par l'importance croissante de ses approvisionnements et des diverses industries afférentes aux besoins d'une semblable colonie. L'air est si pur à Ctésiphon que les rois parthes ont conservé l'habitude d'y passer tous leurs hivers ; mais l'été, c'est à Ecbatane ou bien en Hyrcanie qu'ils transportent leur résidence, à cause du prestige qui demeure attaché à ces noms illustres. »

Elle fut la capitale de la Perse sous les Sassanides. Elle est conquise par Trajan au printemps 116 pour quelques mois. Elle est mise à sac par l'empereur romain Carus en 283. À partir de 317, avec Papa bar Aggai, la ville devient le siège du catholicos de l'Église de l'Orient. Julien y remporta une bataille décisive en 363, mais il fut tué peu après d'un tir de lance au torse. En 637, Ctésiphon tomba aux mains des musulmans durant la conquête musulmane de la Perse sous le commandement de Sa`d ibn Abi Waqqas, à l'époque du calife Omar ibn al-Khattâb.
Selon certains historiens et écrivains, l'incendie commis par les troupes musulmanes des immenses bibliothèques parthes en araméen, contenant tout le savoir de l'Empire sassanide dura plus de six semaines, d'un feu continu, nuit et jour.
Elle prend alors le nom d'Al-Madâ'in.
La ville connut ensuite un rapide déclin à la chute des Omeyyades et devint une ville fantôme. On pense qu'elle servit de référence pour la ville d'Isbanir (fa) dans les contes des Mille et Une Nuits.
En 762, les matériaux de Ctésiphon sont utilisés pour la construction de Bagdad.
Ctésiphon est le cadre d'âpres combats à partir de l'automne 1915, lorsque les britanniques marchent sur Bagdad. Les 14 000 hommes du corps anglo-indien du général Charles Townshend se heurtent sur la rive occidentale du Tigre aux troupes turques du général Noureddine Pacha, numériquement supérieures (18 000 hommes). L'offensive est lancée le 22 novembre 1915. Au cours de l'engagement, les Britanniques perdent 4 500 hommes (les Turcs plus de 9 000) et battent rapidement en retraite, avant de se replier sur Al-Kût.

Architecture
La voûte en briques de 30 mètres de haut (iwan), en forme de « chaînette renversée » est le vestige du palais du roi perse Chapour Ier, vainqueur de l'empereur romain Valérien en 260.
L'aile droite s'est écroulée lors d'une inondation, en 1888 ; sa reconstruction, entreprise par Saddam Hussein, a été interrompue en 1991. Un contrefort a été ajouté sur l'aile gauche.

Notes et références
Annexes
Bibliographie
Guy Rachet, Dictionnaire de l'archéologie, éditions Robert Laffont, coll. « Bouquins », 1994, 1052 p. (ISBN 978-2-221-07904-1), « Ctésiphon », p. 256.
Gergie Zeidan, History of Islamic Civilization, vol. 3, p. 42-47.

Articles connexes
Chapour Ier.
Bûrândûkht.
Séleucie du Tigre.
Siège de Ctésiphon (637) (en).

Liens externes
Photos du palais.
(en) « Salman Pak, Tak Kisra (ancient: Ctesiphon) », sur U.S. Department of Defense Legacy Resource Mangement Program (DoDLRMP).
(en) « Taq-i Kisra », sur ArchNet.
(en) « Archaeological Site Photographs: Mesopotamia: Ctesiphon », sur Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

 Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de l’Irak   Portail de la Mésopotamie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 346
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Ctesiphon
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Ctesiphon is a ruin in Iraq's Baghdad Belts. It was once an ancient Persian capital city, but only a former palace, with the world's largest unreinforced arch, remains standing. The town of Salman Pak is nearby, and is also covered in this article.

## Understand
Ctesiphon was the capital of the Sasanian Empire from 226 AD to its capture by the Arabs in 637 AD. The city has now largely disappeared.
The palace of Taq Kasra is the only structure remaining above ground. The palace is considered an architectural landmark with its arched iwan hall, open on the facade side, about 37 meters high 26 meters across and 50 meters long. This made it the largest man-made, free standing vault constructed until modern times. The throne room—presumably under or behind the arch—was more than 30 m (110 ft) high and covered an area 24 m (80 ft) wide by 48 m (160 ft) long. It is unclear exactly when Taq Kasra was built, some historians believe the founder is Shapour I who ruled Persia from 242 to 272 AD while other believe that construction began during the reign of Anushiruwan the Just after a campaign against the Byzantines in 540 AD.
A number of artifacts belonging to Ctesiphon can be seen at the Museum of Islamic Art in Berlin.

## By car
There are roads connecting nearby Baghdad to Salman Pak.

## See
33.09361144.5808331 Arch of Ctesiphon (Tāq Kasrā). Only visible remaining structure of the ancient city of Ctesiphon. It is the worlds 2nd largest single-span unreinforced brick vault/arch, dated to 3rd-6th Century AD.      (updated Nov 2021)
33.09850444.5812112 Salman Al-Farsi Mosque. Contains the burial place of Salman the Persian, an early companion of Islamic prophet Muhammad.      (updated Nov 2018)

## Salman Pak
Sweets Factory Hussein Alchukrgi

## Eat
Ovens and Pastries Mustafa

## Sleep
There are no hotels in Ctesiphon or Salman Pak. Baghdad is nearby, however, and it's home to several hotels.

## Stay safe
See the warning on the Iraq article for information on the security situation.

## Go next
Baghdad
Baqubah



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
TAQ KASRA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:35:15


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,022
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taq_Kasra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tāq Kasrā (Arabic: طاق كسرى, romanized: ṭāq kisrā), also transcribed as Taq-i Kisra or Taq-e Kesra (Persian: طاق کسری, romanized: tâğe kasrâ) or Ayvān-e Kesrā (Persian: ایوان خسرو, romanized: Eivâne Xosrow, meaning Iwan of Khosrow) are the remains of a Sasanian-era Persian monument, dated to c. the 3rd to 6th centuries, which is sometimes called the Arch of Ctesiphon. It is located near the modern town of Salman Pak, Iraq. It was the facade of the main palace in Ctesiphon, and is the only visible remaining structure of the ancient capital city. The archway is considered a landmark in the history of architecture, and is the second largest single-span vault of unreinforced brickwork in the world after the Gavmishan Bridge in Iran.

History
The exact time of the structure's construction is not known with certainty. Some historians believe it was constructed under Shapur I who ruled Sassanian Persia from 242 to 272 AD and some other believe that construction possibly began during the reign of Anushiruwan the Just (Khosrow I) after a campaign against the Byzantines in 540 AD. The arched iwan hall, open on the facade side, was about 37 meters high, 26 meters across and 50 meters long, the largest man-made, free standing vault constructed until modern times.
The arch was part of the imperial palace complex. The throne room—presumably under or behind the arch—was more than 30 m (110 ft) high and covered an area 24 m (80 ft) wide by 48 m (160 ft) long. The top of the arch is about 1 meter thick while the walls at the base are up to 7 meters thick. The catenary arch was built without centring. In order to make this possible a number of techniques were used. The bricks were laid about 18 degrees from the vertical which allowed them to be partially supported by the rear wall during construction. The quick drying cement used as mortar allowed the fresh bricks to be quickly supported by those that were previously laid.
The Taq Kasra is now all that remains above ground of a city that was, for nine centuries—from the 2nd century BC to the 7th century AD—the main capital of the successor dynasties of the Persian empire: Parthians and Sassanids. The structure left today was the main portico of the audience hall of the Sassanids who maintained the same site chosen by the Parthians and for the same reason, namely proximity to the Roman Empire, whose expansionist aims could be better contained at the point of contact.
The structure was captured by the Arabs during the conquest of Persia in 637. They then used it as a mosque for a while until the area was gradually abandoned. In the early 10th century, the Abbasid caliph al-Muktafi dug up the ruins of the palace to reuse its bricks in the construction of the Taj Palace in Baghdad.
The Arabic poet Al-Buhturi wrote a famous poem about the ruins in the 9th century.
The monument is also the subject of a poem by the Persian poet Khaqani, who visited the ruins in the 12th century.

Modern era
In 1851, French artist Eugène Flandin visited and studied the structure with Pascal Coste who remarked "the Romans had nothing similar or of the type."
In 1888, a serious flood demolished the greater part of the edifice.
In 1940, the British writer Roald Dahl, then undergoing pilot training at RAF Habbaniya near Baghdad took an award-winning photograph using a Zeiss camera of the Arch of Ctesiphon in Iraq which was subsequently auctioned by the Dahl family to raise funds for the Roald Dahl Museum and Story Centre. The photo made £6,000. In his autobiography Boy he writes:

You may not believe it, but when I was eighteen I used to win prizes and medals from the Royal Photographic Society in London, and from other places like the Photographic Society of Holland. I even got a lovely big bronze medal from the Egyptian Photographic Society in Cairo, and I still have the photograph that won it. It is a picture of one of the so-called Seven Wonders of the World, the Arch of Ctesiphon in Iraq. This is the largest unsupported arch on earth and I took the photograph while I was training out there for the RAF in 1940. I was flying over the desert solo in an old Hawker Hart biplane and I had my camera round my neck. When I spotted the huge arch standing alone in a sea of sand, I dropped one wing and hung in my straps and let go of the stick while I took aim and clicked the shutter. It came out fine.
The monument was in the process of being rebuilt by Saddam Hussein's government in the course of the 1980s, when the fallen northern wing was partially rebuilt. All works, however, stopped after the 1991 Persian Gulf War. From 2004 to 2008 the Iraqi government cooperated with the University of Chicago's Diyala Project to restore the site at a cost of $100,000. The Ministry of Culture also invited a Czech company, Avers, to restore the site. This restoration was completed in 2017.
On March 7, 2019, a partial collapse further damaged the Taq Kasra, just two years after its latest restoration was completed.
In January 2021, Iranian Minister of Cultural Heritage Ali Asghar Mounesan mentioned that a credit of about $600,000 would be required for the restoration of Taq Kasra.

Documentary film
In 2017, Pejman Akbarzadeh, based in the Netherlands, made the first full-length documentary film about Taq Kasra: Taq Kasra: Wonder of Architecture. The monument had been in danger of ISIS attacks in 2015–2016; Akbarzadeh feared that it might be destroyed soon, and therefore felt urgency to film his documentary. The film explores the history and architecture of Taq Kasra with many scholars and archaeologists in various countries.

Gallery
See also
Persian Empire
Sasanians
Al-Ukhaidir Fortress
Hatra
Persian architecture

References
External links

Taq Kasra Online Information Center
Archent: Taq-i Kisra
Global Heritage Fund page on Ctesiphon
Swiss journalist's photos of Taq-e Kasra in 1970s: "Taq-e Kasra; a Persian archaeological sight outside Persia (Photo)


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 587
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taq-e_Kisra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Le taq-e Kisra ou Taq Kasra (littéralement : iwan de Chosroès ; en persan : طاق كسرى) est un monument perse sassanide en ruines situé aujourd'hui en Irak, à 35 kilomètres au sud-est de Bagdad. C'est le seul vestige visible de l'antique cité de Ctésiphon (appelée par les Arabes Al-Madaïn).

Histoire
La date de construction de ce palais est incertaine. Il existe deux hypothèses qui retracent la fondation du complexe, reposant sur des sources historiques de nature différentes. Oscar Reuther, spécialiste de l’architecture du Proche-Orient situe la construction du palais dans la première moitié du VIe siècle de notre ère, sous le règne du roi sassanide Khusraw I Anushirvan. Pour avancer son hypothèse, Oscar Reuther met en avant le style de l’arcade aveugle de la façade. C’est donc une analyse architecturale qui lui permet d’énoncer sa supposition. Au contraire, Ernst Herzfeld, iranologue et archéologue allemand, s’appuie sur la chronique sassanide Khudhay-Nama pour situer la date de fondation au IIIe siècle de notre ère, sous le règne Shapur I. Enfin la confusion concernant la date de construction est alimentée par des écrivains de la fin du Moyen Age, tels que Tabari qui confondent le palais avec « le palais blanc ».
Taq-e Kisra est considéré comme le symbole de l'Empire perse durant la dynastie sassanide. Il est un symbole de la puissance de l’empire sassanide. L'arc, le plus grand jamais construit à cette époque, mesure 37 mètres de hauteur, 27 mètres de largeur et 50 mètres de longueur. La forme de l'arc s'approche d'une loi mathématique : la « chaînette renversée », appelée ainsi par Huygens en 1691. Il est probable que l’iwan s’ouvrait sur une cour massive et qu’un autre iwan, aussi monumental lui faisait face.
Concernant la décoration, des tessons de mosaïques de verres ont été retrouvés à proximité.
Cette construction marque l’imaginaire des musulmans et va devenir la matrice d’une architecture avec des porches ouverts sur jardins que l’on retrouve dans de nombreuses mosquées ou encore sous la forme d’iwan donnant sur des cours.
Pendant l'expansion islamique du VIIe siècle, le palais est en partie détruit. Selon les historiens, l'autodafé des immenses bibliothèques perses par les troupes musulmanes, contenant tout le savoir de l'empire sassanide dura plus de six semaines, d'un feu continu, nuit et jour. En 1888, une crue du Tigre provoque l'effondrement d'un tiers de l'édifice et en 1909, une partie de la façade nord s'effondre. En 1972, la Direction Générale des Antiquités d’Irak entame la restauration de l’aile sud. Les travaux de restauration pour l’aile nord débutent en 1975. Sa reconstruction, entreprise par Saddam Hussein, a été interrompue en 1991. Le monument n'est pas classé à l'Organisation des Nations unies pour l'éducation, la science et la culture (UNESCO).

En 2018, Pejman Akbarzadeh a réalisé le premier documentaire sur Taq Kasra. Le film a été présenté dans divers musées et conférences en Europe et aux Etats-Unis.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Marcel Dieulafoy, L'Art antique de la Perse. Achéménides, Parthes, Sassanides, Paris, 1889
André Godard, L'Art de l'Iran, Paris, 1962
Oscar Reuther, “Sasanian Architecture”; Survey of Persian Art, Oxford University Press, 1964
Bier Lionel, “The sassanian Palaces and their influence in Early Islam”, Ars Orientalis, Vol.23, 1993, p. 57-66
F. Demange, Les Perses sassanides : fastes d'un empire oublié, 224-642, Paris, 2006
E. J. Keall, “Ayvan-e Kesra”, Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. 3, 2011, p.155-159.

Articles connexes
Conquête musulmane de la Perse
Sassanides

Liens externes
Taq Kasra en Ctesiphon (Video)
 Portail de l’architecture et de l’urbanisme   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de l’Irak   Portail de la Mésopotamie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 3,710
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Taq_Kasra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Baghdad (Arabic: بـغداد Baġdād) is the capital and largest city of Iraq, with an estimated population of 6-7 million. Once one of the greatest centres of learning and culture in the world, Baghdad was the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate during the Islamic Golden Age. It was once a favoured destination on the 'hippie trail' and is packed full of sights.

## History
Founded in 762 CE by caliph al-Mansur as the Round City, Baghdad became the seat of the Abbasid Caliphate and grew into one of the largest scientific centres in the Islamic world during the Golden Age of Islam. Five centuries of peace came to an end in 1258 when the city was destroyed by the Mongols who advanced westwards. After a period of Ottoman rule, Baghdad became the capital of Iraq under a British protectorate and as an independent state. Since then, Baghdad has been subject to war, terrorist attacks and attempts at reconstruction.

## By plane
The national airline is Iraqi Airways[dead link] that operates a growing fleet of more than 30 modern jets. They mainly provide domestic flights but Iraqi Airways also offers flights to numerous international destinations, including a few routes from Europe. Numerous other operators in the Middle East also fly to Baghdad, with daily flights from most regional hubs. There are also a few low cost airlines such as FlyBaghdad that have flights to Baghdad. The best way to travel from Europe is either with Austrian or Turkish Airlines. They operate several direct flights per week from Vienna and daily from Istanbul respectively. For those working for Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) in Iraq, there are charter airlines operating into Baghdad.
The frequent sandstorms that hit the area can obscure visibility and cause flights to be turned away. It is not unusual for commercial flights to make it all the way to BIAP, and then turn around and return to their origin due to limited visibility on the runway.
33.26706644.2310971 Baghdad International Airport (مطار بغداد الدولي) (16 km west from the centre of Baghdad). All of the usual airport facilities are available, such as banks, money exchange, ATMs, mobile phone companies, restaurants and even a hotel. The airport has three interlinked terminals. It is easy to walk between the terminals both land side and air side. One terminal is used by Iraqi Airways (the most counter-clockwise one) and the middle one handles all other flights. The food outlets are small and limited air side, so if you have a long wait, it is better to check in and return back through security to use the land side restaurants. When departing, be prepared for some queuing. Entrance to the airport grounds about three or four miles from the airport terminal will require you and your vehicle to wait in line to be searched. Security checkpoints can take from two to three hours to process through. BGW  IATA      (updated Jul 2020)

## By train
Baghdad is the heart of Iraqs' limited railway system. International trains, such as the famous Taurus Express from Istanbul, have been suspended since 2003 and are not likely to return for the foreseeable future. However, there are several domestic services which are useful for tourists. An overnight service connects Baghdad with the southern port city of Basra every night. Both sleeper and couchette classes are available, with price ranging from 10,000 dinars for a couchette to 25,000 dinars for premium sleepers. The train also carries a restaurant car.
There are twice-daily trains from Ramadi via Fallujah and a weekly service from Samarra. Additionally, there are seasonal services from Karbala, mostly during religious festivals.
33.323744.38052 Baghdad Central railway station (محطة بغداد المركزية) (Qahira Street, a kilometre north of city centre, at Damascus Square.). Completed in 1953, Baghdad Central railway station is an architecturally impressive terminus, all trains call here.      (updated May 2024)

## By car
Overland travel is possible from all neighbouring countries and while major roads are generally in an acceptable condition, travelling by car is strongly discouraged due to violence. Baghdad is in the centre of Iraq's highway network, with Freeway 1 from Basra and continuing towards the Jordanian borde being the major thoroughfare. Confusingly, the road from Mosul is named Highway 1.

## By bus
Multiple daily buses arrive from most major Iraqi cities. Long-distance bus services from Istanbul and Ankara restarted in the summer of 2018, with two departures per week. However journey time is a gruelling 30 hours or more. Most long-distance buses arrive at the sprawling 33.3245844.3844773 Al-Alawi bus terminal (گراج العلاوي), next to the central station. Buses leave and arrive from stands both north and south of the Allawi skyway.

## Get around
While the almost daily bombings and shootings have subsided, there is always a risk of getting caught in violence when travelling around the city. Staying vigilant is essential. Many high-end hotels provide their own transport, some even with armoured cars.
Baghdad is served by an extensive but chaotic bus network; maps and route information for the network are not available in English. Taxis are also plentiful and quite cheap to use. Walking is possible in parts of the city, especially in and around the old city. Cycling is not uncommon among locals, but there is next to no infrastructure to support it.

## See
A combination of heavy redevelopment during the second half of the 20th century, two decades of warfare and neglect has not been kind to Baghdad's architectural and cultural heritage. Generally, the eastern side contains the older districts while the western side is newer. The historic old quarter contains a myriad of alleys and small streets with buildings dating back to the Ottoman era or even older. Many of them are unfortunately in various stages of disrepair. The old quarter is also home to the heart and soul of Iraqi literacy  and intellectual community, Mutanabbi Street. The street is lined with bookstores and outdoor book stalls as well as cafés to discuss matters of the day.
33.33845444.3897671 Mustansiriya Madrasah (المدرسة المستنصرية). Often referred to as the Abbasid Palace, this medieval-era scholarly complex was established in 1227 CE. It's one of the oldest buildings still standing in Baghdad and a central landmark in the historic district.      (updated Jul 2020)
33.341244.3862 Qushla building. Ottoman landmark building.   (updated Nov 2020)
33.31467244.3732083 Baghdad Zoo (حديقة حيوانات بغداد). The largest zoo in the country, opened in 1971. It was destroyed in the 2003 war but has quickly recovered. There are, however, few larger mammals to see.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.338644.39254 Khan Murjan (خان مرجان). First built in the 14th century as a caravanserai, an inn for traveling merchants, whose centre was a hall more than 13 metres high.   (updated Sep 2021)
33.31463344.4206755 Firdos Square (ساحة الفردوس). A public open space surrounded by several artwork monuments.

## Museums
33.32833344.3858336 National Museum of Iraq (المتحف العراقي). Covering the history of Mesopotamian culture, this museum housed a huge collection before the Iraq War. Many pieces were looted, but in 2022, the museum was refurbished and reopened.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.34022744.3897747 Baghdadi Museum (المتحف البغدادي) (eastern bank of Tigris, 200 m from Shuhada bridge). History and folklore museum depicting life in Baghdad.      (updated Feb 2017)
33.330844.41118 National Museum of Modern Art (المتحف الوطني للفن الحديث). While much of the rich heritage of modern Iraqi art has been lost or stolen during the recent decades, the Museum of Modern Art still holds an impressive collection.  (updated Dec 2023)
33.354644.39269 Natural History Museum (متحف التاريخ الطبيعي).  (updated Jan 2022)
33.327244.405410 Abdel-Karim Kassem Museum (متحف عبد الكريم قاسم). Small museum dedicated to the leader of the 14 July Revolution, Abdel-Karim Kassem, who overthrew the Iraqi monarchy in 1958.   (updated Jan 2022)
Iraqi Post Museum.  (updated Jan 2022)

## Monuments, memorials and public art
Baghdad is home to many monumental monuments and displays of public art. Many were built during the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein and evoke mixed feelings among locals, while others are universally loved. A large number of high-profile public sculptures were made by Mohammed Ghani Hikmat (1929-2011), nicknamed the sheik of sculptors.
33.30855644.38916711 Monument to the Unknown Soldier (صرح الجندي المجهول). Inspired by the glorification of a martyr from the Iran–Iraq War. The monument represents a traditional shield (dira¹a) dropping from the dying grasp of an Iraqi warrior. The monument used to house a museum which is now mostly empty. Ask the Iraqi soldiers who guard the monument for permission.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.34333344.44611112 Al-Shaheed Monument (نُصب الشهيد) (east side of the Tigris river, near the Army Canal). First built as a monument dedicated to the Iraqi soldiers who died in the Iran-Iraq war. Since the fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003, it has been repurposed to a monument for all Iraqi martyrs including victims of his regime. The monument consists of a circular platform 190 metres in diameter in the centre of an artificial lake. A museum, library, cafeteria, lecture hall, and exhibition gallery are on two levels underneath the domes.      (updated Sep 2021)
33.30555644.38305613 Swords of Qādisīyah (قوس النصر) (inside the Green Zone). A huge pair of triumphal arches celebrating the alleged victory over Iran. Also known as the Hands of Victory. It marks the entrances to a former parade ground.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.3282644.40925214 Freedom Monument (نصب الحرية). Located at the epicenter of Baghdadi civic life, the Tahrir square, this iconic and massive sculpture is one of the city's most well-loved monuments. Completed in 1961, the sculpture spans almost 50 meters in length and features bronze castings depicting the history of Iraq.      (updated Feb 2020)
33.31128244.42400215 Kahramana, Sa'adoon St. Depicting a scene from the legend of Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves, in which the slave girl Marjana outwitted the thieves by tricking them into hiding inside jars over which she poured hot oil.      (updated Jul 2020)
33.31544.367516 Save Iraqi culture monument (نصب انقاذ الثقافة). Built in 2010, meant to remind Iraqis on the fragility of its cultural heritage.   (updated Dec 2020)
33.345944.369217 Ashaar Baghdad. Dedicated to the poetry of Baghdad.   (updated Feb 2021)
33.3544244.3864818 North Gate War Cemetery. A Commonwealth War Graves cemetery, commemorating military personnel killed in Iraq during World War I and World War II.   (updated Nov 2021)

## Mosques
33.37209144.35840919 Abu Hanifa Mosque. One of Baghdad's most prominent Sunni mosques, it surrounds the tomb of Abu Hanifa, the founder of the Hanafi school of Islamic jurisprudence.      (updated Mar 2021)
33.3844.33813920 Al-Kadhimiya Mosque (الحضرة الكاظمية) (northwest of Baghdad). One of the most important Shi'ite religious sites in Iraq. It was finished in 1515 and the 7th Musa ibn Jafar al-Kathim and the 9th Imams Mohammed Al-Jawad were buried there.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.37768444.37345421 Al-Asifyah Mosque. A complex of mosque, madrasa with school buildings, old courts and other former government buildings, and a palace. Together they form a complex that is a tentative UNESCO World Heritage Site.      (updated Aug 2020)
33.33886744.39771622 Al-Khulafa Mosque. Oldest mosque in Baghdad with parts dating back to 902 AD.      (updated Aug 2020)
33.339244.388523 Al-Wazeer Mosque. Built in the 1660s.   (updated Dec 2021)
33.341744.386724 Al-Sarai Mosque (جامع السراي). Sunni mosque completed in 1293 AD.   (updated Oct 2024)
33.35094444.36102825 Buratha Mosque. Historic mosque complex, with some parts previously used as a Christian monastery.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.34254544.38942326 Haydar-Khana Mosque. Considered one of the finest examples of the Ottoman constructions in Baghdad.   (updated Dec 2021)
33.33777844.29638927 Umm al-Qura Mosque (جامع أم القرى). A mosque built to commemorate the "victory" in the 1991 Gulf War, the minarets are shaped like barrels of guns and SCUD missiles.      (updated Dec 2017)
33.33162644.37289328 Zumurrud Khatun Mosque and Mausoleum (southeastern end of Sheikh Maarouf Cemetery). Historic mosque and shrine, dating back to the Abbasid era.      (updated Jul 2020)
33.3364544.4079929 Mausoleum of Abdul Qadir Gilani. Mosque and mausoleum dedicated to Abdul Qadir Gilani, an 11th century mystic who was the founded of the Qadiriyya Sufi Order.      (updated Nov 2021)
33.35055644.40194430 Mausoleum of Umar Suhrawardi. A historic complex of a mausoleum and a mosque dating back to the Abbasid era and is dedicated to Shahab al-Din Abu Hafs Umar Suhrawardi, the founder of Suhrawardiyya Sufi Order.   (updated Nov 2021)
33.346344.383331 Uzbek Mosque (جامع الأزبك). Historic mosque built by Uzbek immigrants during the 17th century.   (updated Oct 2024)
33.32370544.38356832 Ibn Bunnieh Mosque (جامع ابن بنيه).   (updated Oct 2024)

## Churches
33.33813944.39552833 Cathedral of Our Lady of Sorrows. Built in 1898, it is the seat of the Chaldean Catholic Patriarchate of Babylon.      (updated Feb 2020)
33.30938644.4347534 St. Joseph's Cathedral (كاتدرائية القديس يوسف). Seat of the Archdiocese of Baghdad, the current building dates back to 1866.      (updated Feb 2020)
33.30694444.42583335 Sayidat al-Nejat Cathedral (كاتدرائية سيدة النجاة). The main Syriac Catholic Church in Baghdad. Constructed in 1968, in a striking modernist style.   (updated Nov 2020)
33.33010844.41434436 St. Gregory the Great Armenian Church (كنيسة غريغور الأرمنية).   (updated Jan 2022)
33.326544.395437 St George's Church. Anglican church, built in 1936.    (updated Jan 2024)

## Synagogues and Jewish heritage
Iraq was home to a large Jewish population until the early 1950s. Many left for Israel, often forcefully displaced by the government. Today, only fragments remain of Baghdad's Jewish heritage and there's a handful of Jews residing in the city.
33.341344.396438 Great Synagogue of Baghdad. Formerly the main synagogue in Baghdad, now abandoned and neglected. Said to be built on the site of a former synagogue, built by King Jeconiah, who was exiled from the Land of Israel to Babylon, in 597 BCE.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.32255744.41686139 Meir Taweig Synagogue. Only remaining active synagogue. Small and unassuming, visits have to be booked beforehand.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.336144.364240 Tomb of Joshua the High Priest. One of several tombs claiming to be the tomb of Joshua, the first High Priest at the reconstruction of the Jewish Temple after the return of the Jews from the Babylonian Captivity around 500 BCE.    (updated Oct 2024)
33.364244.459141 Al-Habibiyah Jewish Cemetery (In Sadr City). With the historic Jewish cemetery in central Baghdad destroyed, this is where most Jewish graves have been relocated to.      (updated Oct 2024)

## Other religious sites
33.33618844.36393742 Baba Nanak Shrine (مقام بابا نانك). Ruins of a Sikh gurdwara, house of worship, and shrine dedicated to Baba Nanak who was the founder of Sikhism and visited Baghdad in the 16th century. Little remains of the shrine but remains a popular place to visit for Indian Sikhs who comes to Baghdad.   (updated Oct 2024)
33.28172444.35853143 Sabian Mandi of Baghdad. A mandaean temple.   (updated Oct 2024)

## Palaces and landmarks
During the reign of Saddam Hussein, a large number of palaces were built. While not tourist sites per se, they can be of interest to the intrepid traveller. Many are in various states of disrepair and might not be open to the public.
33.28361144.25611144 Al-Faw Palace (قصر الفاو). Also known as the Water Palace for its site beside the Tigris River. Used as a military base for US troops      (updated Dec 2017)
33.30084844.36133445 As-Salam Palace. Home of former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein.   (updated Oct 2020)
33.30416744.40861146 Republican Palace (القصر الجمهوري). Commissioned by King Faisal II in the 1950s as the new principal Royal residence. The palace serves as a key government building and can only be seen from outside.   (updated Oct 2020)
33.30258344.37547 Baghdad Clock. Landmark building with a striking large clock at the top.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.30333344.35416748 Baghdad Tower (برج بغداد). A 205 m (673 ft) TV tower. Was known in Ba'athist times as the International Saddam tower and is one of the tallest towers in Iraq. There's an observation deck at the top, which has been open intermittently.   (updated Dec 2021)
33.28897244.384549 Central Bank of Iraq Tower (برج البنك المركزي العراقي). Designed by Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid, this 37 story tower is set to become one of the most striking landmarks when completed in 2023.   (updated Jan 2022)
33.351844.404150 Bab al-Wastani (باب الوسطاني). Last remaining part of the historic Baghdad city wall.    (updated Jan 2022)
33.365544.357851 Iraq Royal Cemetery. Mausoleum of the former royal family, King Faisal I (1883-1933), King Ghazi (1912-1939) and King Faisal II (1935-1958) are buried here.   (updated Jul 2022)

## Archaeological sites
33.3537244.2022952 Dur-Kurigalzu. Situated along an east-west-trending limestone ridge between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, the town of Dur Kurigalzu was founded by the Kassite King Kurigalzu I in the late 15th or early 14th century BC. Today, the ruins contains among other a well-preserved ziggurat.   (updated Nov 2020)
33.36666744.46666753 Shaduppum. Also known as Tell Harmal. The site has been occupied at least between 2100 BC and 1700 BC. Several artifacts from the site can be found in the Iraqi museums.   (updated Nov 2020)

## Do
33.30361144.4322221 Iraqi National Theatre (المسرح الوطني العراقي).   (updated Dec 2021)
33.441744.34352 Baghdad Island Park (جزيرة بغداد السياحية) (12 km north of central Baghdad). Large outdoor amusement park with swimming pools, restaurants, cafés and an observation tower.  (updated Jul 2022)

## Work
There are several ways to work in Iraq as a foreigner. For US citizens the most obvious is the US Army, which still maintains personnel here. Next are the government contractors, such as the construction company KBR[dead link]. Many contractors hire personnel with prior military experience to return to Iraq. Persons with military experience or who are fluent in Arabic are especially sought after. Lastly, there are civilian government agencies in Iraq. USAID  send their own personnel as well as contractors to Iraq.
The agencies above are all relevant for US citizens. Citizens of other countries with a presence in Iraq can apply for work through the respective agencies in their home country.

## Buy
Rugs and DVDs are available to buy. Inspect the quality of rugs carefully: Some are cheap Chinese-made rugs, and many are extremely overpriced. Also, many DVDs, especially those from street vendors, are bootlegs of varying quality.
33.31194444.3647221 Baghdad Mall (بغداد مول). Large upscale shopping mall in Baghdad, with both shops and restaurants.   (updated Jan 2022)

## Traditional markets
Baghdad is home to several traditional markets with vendors that both produce and sell their goods at the same market. One traditional art is coppersmithing with the Baghdad copper souk producing some of the finest copper artifacts in the world. However it and several other traditional crafts are in decline due to cheaper imported goods.
33.33999944.391762 Coppersmith souk (Souk al-Safafeer, سوق الصفافير).   (updated Dec 2023)

## Eat
Restaurants and cafés have been notorious targets for suicide bombers in the past, making eating out a quite dangerous activity.

## Mid-range
33.2594544.2333321 Baghdad International Airport Hotel (فندق مطار بغداد الدولي). A standard business hotel, but with quite a hefty price. On secure grounds at the airport and often used by people visiting on business. USD225 for a standard room, lower rates when staying longer.    (updated Jul 2020)
33.30079744.4200142 Inter Hotel, Abu Nawas St, ☏ +964 780 926 2844.    (updated Jul 2020)

## Splurge
33.29119544.3902523 Babylon Rotana Baghdad Hotel, Karrada St, ☏ +964 7 505 223 333.      (updated Jul 2020)
33.28266744.3940564 Coral Baghdad Hotel, Corner of Jamia St and Mohammed Ismail Ezzat St, in Jadriyah District, ☏ +964 781 440 0000, info@coral-hotelbaghdad.com. An upstart hotel that has quickly become one of the most popular higher-end hotels in Baghdad. USD215+.    (updated Jul 2016)
33.31387144.4188665 Cristal Grand Ishtar Hotel, Saadoun St, ☏ +964 770 6770711. A hotel in central Baghdad. USD50+.      (updated Nov 2018)
33.29947444.4333886 Qaser Al-Masbah Hotel (at Masbah Crossing in Karada district), ☏ +964 783 403 8087, masbahplazahotel@yahoo.com. Luxury hotel, restaurant on site. Free Wi-Fi.    (updated Feb 2017)

## Drink
While Baghdad is undergoing something of a liberalization regarding both night life and alcohol, it is still not widely available and large parts of society frowns upon it. While some bars exists, particularly along Abu Nawas Street, a safe bet is always the bars of the top tier hotels. Many international organisations have their own bars as well, and some are open to outsiders.
Tea houses and cafés are however ubiquitous, and often open late into the night.
33.340144.38821 Shahbandar Café, Mutanabbi St. The oldest operating tea house in Baghdad, established in 1907. A hub to discuss matters of the day over a cup of tea.      (updated Sep 2021)

## Sleep
Most organizations arrange their own accommodation. Sleeping in hotels in the proper city is always a risk due to bombings.

## Stay safe
Travel to Baghdad is not recommended because of security concerns. Westerners are particular targets of kidnapping and assassination by militant and extremist groups. Baghdad airport is secure, so transiting there if necessary is safe. See the warning on the Iraq article.
The easiest way to stay safe in Baghdad is not to go there in the first place, except for official reasons. Most expats and business travellers to Iraq hire a security detail, which constantly monitors the security situation within Iraq and around Baghdad. Travel outside the International Zone is extremely dangerous. Roadside and car bombs are detonated every day in Baghdad. Many Iraqis are armed. Markets and popular gathering places are frequent targets of bombers. As a foreigner you are more likely to be targeted for kidnapping. Kidnappings are often financially motivated. These threats are not restricted to Americans or women.

## Heatwaves
Baghdad is prone to heatwaves, with temperatures exceeding 50 °C (122 °F) during July and August. Making the situation worse, frequent electrical outages means that even where there is air conditioning it might not work. Being prepared and staying hydrated is essential.

## Embassies
Australia, Haifa Street, next to Ibn Sina Hospital, International Zone, Baghdad, Iraq, ☏ +964 780 923 7565, info.baghdad@dfat.gov.au.
Canada, British Embassy Compound, International Zone, ☏ +964 782 783 5084, BGHDD.Consular@international.gc.ca.
China, P.O.Box 2386，Al-jadryaa Post Office, ☏ +964 790 191 2315, chinaemb_iq@mfa.gov.cn.
Greece, Hay Babil, AL-Jadriyah Sector 913, Rd. 31/ Built 63, ☏ +964 1 778 2273, +964 790 364 2046 (Emergencies), fax: +870-763262272, gremb.bag@mfa.gr.
Romania, Mahalla 601, Zuqaq 15, no. C45, Al-Mansur Street, ☏ +964 780 446 2039, +964 0780 568 1943, fax: +964 1 778-04-89, bagdad@mae.ro. Embassy
Serbia, Jadriya Babil District Mahala 923, ZUKAK 35, Bldg 16, ☏ +964 1 778-78-87, fax: +964 1 778-04-89.
United Kingdom, International Zone, ☏ +44 1908 516666, Baghdad.consularenquiries@fco.gov.uk.
33.29864244.3956781 United States, Al-Kindi St, International Zone. Su-Th 08:00-16:30.

## Go next
Basra — second largest city in Iraq and its main port city
Mosul — third largest city in Iraq
Assur and Hatra — archaeological sites from the Cradle of Civilization
Ctesiphon — archaeological sites just south of Baghdad



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
NAJAF
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:35:24


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,896
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Najaf
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Najaf is the capital city of the eponymous Najaf Governorate in central Iraq, about 160 km (99 mi) south of Baghdad. Its estimated population in 2024 was about 1.41 million people. It is widely considered amongst the holiest cities of Shia Islam and one of its spiritual capitals, as well as the center of Shia political power in Iraq.
It is the burial place of Muhammad's son in law and cousin, ‘Alī ibn Abī Tālib, and thus a major pilgrimage destination for Shia Muslims. The largest cemetery in the world (Wadi-us-Salaam) and the oldest Shi'a Islamic seminary in the world (Hawza of Najaf) are located in Najaf.

Etymology
According to Ibn Manzur, the word, "najaf" (نجف), literally means a high and rectangular place around which water is accumulated, although the water does not go above its level. Al-Shaykh al-Saduq appeals to a hadith from Ja'far al-Sadiq, claiming that "Najaf" comes from the phrase, "nay jaff" which means "the nay sea has dried".
"Najaf" is usually accompanied by the adjective "al-Ashraf" (the dignified). According to the author of al-Hawza al-'ilmiyya fi l-Najaf al-ashraf, this is because 'Ali, one of the most dignified persons, is buried in the city.
Al-Ghari or al-Ghariyyan, Hadd al-'Adhra', al-Hiwar, al-Judi, Wadi l-Salam, al-Zahr, Zahr al-Kufa (behind Kufa), al-Rabwa, Baniqiya, and Mashhad are other names for this land.

History
The area of An-Najaf is located 30 km (19 mi) south of the ancient city of Babylon, and 400 km (248 mi) north of the ancient city of Ur. The city itself was founded in 791 AD, by the Abbasid Caliph Harūn ar-Rashīd, as a shrine to ‘Alī bin Abī Ṭālib.

Prehistoric and ancient times
Archaeological discoveries show the existence of a populace dating back to the 1st century BC. Najaf possesses one of the largest burial grounds in the vicinity for Christians. Discoveries in the following centuries point toward the city's multicultural and diverse religious history. Mohammed al-Mayali, director of Inspectorate Effects of the province of Najaf, states "the excavation on the graves, which we have been working on for years, confirm that "Najaf" contains the largest Christian cemetery in Iraq, with a cemetery area of 1416 acres. We have found indications of Christianity on the graves through representations of crosses and stones with Christ-like engravings. There are also relics that date back to the Sassanid period. Also discovered in the excavation was proof of a thriving glass industry. Pots were decorated with the cross. as well as Hebrew writings, indicating a community of religious coexistence."
Wadi-us-Salaam in Najaf was once a holy cemetery for Jews and was then called Baniqia, which could be the first recorded name for the area.

The name Baniqia also was found in some texts which state that Abraham once visited and stayed in this village before continuing his journey from Mesopotamia to Arabia.
In Islam, the city is considered to have started with Ali who instructed that his burial place should remain a secret, as he had many enemies and he feared that his body might be subjected to some indignity. According to legend, the body of Ali was placed on a camel which was driven from Kufah. The camel stopped a few miles west of the city where the body was secretly buried. No tomb was raised and nobody knew of the burial place except for a few trusted people. It is narrated that more than a hundred years later the Abbasid Caliph, Harun al-Rashid, went deer hunting outside Kufah, and the deer sought sanctuary at a place where the hounds would not pursue it. On inquiry as to why the place was a sanctuary, he was told that it was the burial place of ‘Ali. Harūn ar-Rashīd ordered a mausoleum to be built on the spot and in due course the town of Najaf grew around the mausoleum.

Medieval and modern history
In early 14th century, Sheikh Ibn Battuta visited the burial site of Ali ibn Abi Talib during his travels in Iraq after his pilgrimage to Mecca. During this period, Najaf was called Meshhed Ali. As Translated by Samuel Lee, Ibn Battuta in his Arabic Rihla relates:

We next proceeded to the city of Meshhed Ali where the grave of Ali ibn Abu Talib is thought to be. It is a handsome place and well peopled. There is no governor here, except a sort of tribune. The inhabitants consist chiefly of rich and brave merchants. About the gardens are plastered walls adorned with paintings, and within them are carpets, couches and lamps of gold and silver. Within the city is a large treasury kept by the tribune, which arises from the votive offerings arrived from different parts: for when anyone happens to be ill, or suffer under any infirmity, he will make a vow, and thence receive relief. The garden is also famous for its miracles; and hence it is believed that the grave of Ali is there. 
Of these miracles, the "night of revival" is one: for, on the 17th day of the month Rejeb, cripples come from different parts of Fars, Room, Khorasaan, Irak, and other places, assemble in companies from twenty to thirty in number. They are placed over the grave soon after sun-set. People then, some praying, some reciting the Quran, and others prostrating themselves, wait expecting their recovery and rising, when about the night, they all get up sound and right. This is a matter well known among them: I heard it from a creditable person, but was not present at one of those nights. I saw, however, several such afflicted persons, who had not yet received, but were looking forward for the advantages of this "night of revival".
In the 16th century, Najaf was conquered by the Ottomans, and became part of Ottoman Iraq. The Safavid dynasty of Iran maintained continuous interest to this Shia site. During the Ottoman–Safavid War (1623–1639), they were twice able to capture the city, but lost it again to the Ottomans in 1638.
Under the rule of the Ottoman Empire, Najaf experienced severe difficulties as the result of repeated raids by Arab desert tribes and the Persian army with acute water shortages causing lack of a reliable water supply. The number of inhabited houses in the city had plummeted from 3,000 to just 30 by the start of the 16th century.
When the Portuguese traveller Pedro Texeira passed through Najaf in 1604, he found the city in ruins, inhabited by little more than 500 people. This was largely the result of a change in the course of the Euphrates river eastwards in the direction of Hilla, leaving Najaf and Kufa high and dry, leading to the destruction of the local formerly rich agriculture, demise of the palm groves and orchards, followed by the salinization of the underground water due to evaporation.
During the 18th century, the scholarly life of Najaf came to be dominated by Farsi-speaking ‘Ulema’ (Arabic: عُلُمَاء, Scholars) from Iran.
The water shortages were finally resolved in 1803 when the Euphrates made its way to the city once again. The shift in the river's flow was the product of a century-long effort by the Ottomans to shift the flow of the river, so as to deprive marsh-dwelling tribes like the Khaza'il of the watery environment that allowed them to evade state control. These long-term efforts rendered successful the construction of the Hindiyya Canal in 1793, which further shifted the flow of the Euphrates. These hydrological shifts were to have religious implications. Most notable was the consolidation and spread of Shi'ism. As the shrine city of Najaf gained access to water again, its notables and holy men began to wield considerable power in the area. In 1811, the last city wall was rebuilt.

Modern period
The Ottomans were expelled in an uprising in 1915, following which the city fell under the rule of the British Empire. The sheikhs of Najaf including Sayyed Mahdi Al-Awadi rebelled in 1918, killing the British governor of the city, and cutting off grain supplies to the Anazzah, a tribe allied with the British. In retaliation the British besieged the city and cut off its water supply. The rebellion was put down and the rule of the sheikhs was forcibly ended. A great number of the Shi‘i ‘Ulema’ were expelled into Persia, where they set the foundations for the rise of the city of Qom as the center of the Shi‘ite learning and authority, in lieu of Najaf. Najaf lost its religious primacy to Qom, and was not to regain it until the 21st century, during the establishment of a Shī‘ī-majority government in Iraq after 2003.
In the 20th century, much of the Old City was rebuilt in a series of modernization initiatives. Beginning in the 1950s, many historic buildings and monuments, including those adjoining the shrine, were demolished for the construction of Sadeq, Zainulabidin, Rasool and Tousi streets. In 1958, the city wall was torn down and replaced with a ring road. In the 1980s, the entire area between the shrine and the city's western edge was demolished, and the residents resettled outside the city, in what locals perceived as a government reprisal for the Shia uprising under the leadership of Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, who was based in the neighborhood.
During the 2003 U.S. invasion of Iraq, Najaf was a key target of the invading United States Armed Forces. The city was encircled during heavy fighting on 26 March 2003 and was captured on 3 April 2003 (Battle of Najaf). The clerical authorities of the Shī‘ī enclave of Sadr City in Baghdad, which claimed autonomy in April 2003, after the fall of Baghdad, claimed to be taking their orders from senior clerics in Najaf.
On 4 April 2004, the Mahdi Army attacked the Spanish-Salvadoran-ALARNG base (Camp Golf, later renamed Camp Baker) in An Najaf, part of a coordinated uprising across central and southern Iraq in an apparent attempt to seize control of the country ahead of the 30 June 2004 handover of power to a new Iraqi government. This uprising led to the American troops arriving in the city in the wake of the Spanish withdrawal. In August 2004, heavy fighting broke out again between U.S. forces and Al-Sadr's Mahdi Army. The battle lasted three weeks and ended when senior Iraqi cleric Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani negotiated an end to the fighting.
In 2012, Najaf was named the Cultural Centre of the Arab World. On 6 March 2021, Pope Francis visited the city during his historic papal visit to Iraq and held an interfaith dialogue with al-Sistani, where he expressed a message of peaceful coexistence between Muslims and Christians in the country. During the ISIS war, Najaf Shiites launched solidarity initiative with Sunni areas affected by ISIS. Many Iraqis including religious minorities such as Christians from the north, as well as Lebanese Shia have found safe haven in the city.

Geography
Climate
Najaf has a hot desert climate, BWh in the Köppen climate classification, with long, very hot summers and mild winters. The average annual temperature is 23.6 °C (74.5 °F). The rainfall averages 69 mm (2.71 in).

Religious significance
An-Najaf is considered sacred by Shi'a Muslims. An-Najaf is renowned as the site of the burial place of Muhammad's son-in-law and cousin, ‘Alī ibn Abī Tālib. The city is now a center of pilgrimage throughout the Shi'ite Islamic world. It is estimated that only Mecca and Medina receive more Muslim pilgrims. As the burial site of one of Shi'a Islam's most important figure, the Imam Ali Mosque is considered by Shiites as the third holiest Islamic site.
The Imam ‘Ali Mosque is housed in a grand structure with a gold gilded dome and many precious objects in the walls. Nearby is the Wadi-us-Salaam cemetery, the largest in the world. It contains the tombs of several prophets and many of the devout from around the world aspire to be buried there, to be raised from the dead with Imām ‘Alī on Judgement Day. Over the centuries, numerous hospices, schools, libraries and convents were built around the shrine to make the city the center of Shīʻa learning and theology.
The An-Najaf seminary, or Hawza Najaf, is one of the most important teaching centres in the Islamic world. Ayatollah Khomeini lectured there from 1965 to 1978. Many of the leading figures of the new Islamic movement that emerged in Iraq, Iran and Lebanon in the 1970s had studied at Najaf. As of 2014, it was estimated to have about 13,000 students.

Economy
The fall of the Ba'athist regime ended restrictions on Shi'ite pilgrimage, which led to a pilgrimage boom in Najaf and increased demand for facilities and infrastructure. In 2006, the government sponsored reconstruction of the previously demolished western area of the city as the City of Pilgrims project. Najaf, alongside Karbala, is considered a thriving pilgrimage destination for Shia Muslims and the pilgrimage industry in the city boomed after the end of Saddam Hussein's rule. However, due to the U.S. sanctions on Iran, the number of Iranian pilgrims dropped significantly.
Since the end of the 2003–2011 war, numerous projects have been proposed for Najaf. The city has become a model for development in Iraq. Najaf have been experiencing economic boom, along with political events. In 2008, over 50% of about licensed 200 investment projects totaling $8 billion were under construction in Najaf Governorate, with most development coming in the housing and tourism sectors. Najaf has been described as a strategically important city with a stable investment environment and available skilled manpower. The city has experienced an increase in investment. Saudi Arabian firm ACWA Power is in process to construct a 1,000 MW solar power plant in Najaf.

The government proposed to build 15 housing complexes in Najaf, with a cost of $7 billion as a part of 240 projects. It also includes development of two industrial parks. In 2024, prime minister Mohammed Shia' Al Sudani announced several projects in the city, during his visit to Najaf. The projects proposed by Al-Sudani included the Holy shrine's carpet-washing factory project will cost 3.46 billion. A cement bag factory covering an area of 75,000 square meters with a production capacity of 240 million bags per year, is being constructed in Najaf. Another project is a glass production factory, which will have a net profit of 32% in the first year of operation because the Najaf desert region has high-quality raw materials for this factory.

Culture
Religious tourism
Najaf being home to the Sanctuary of Imam Ali (considered the patriarch and the first of the Twelve Imams) is the destination of large numbers of Shi’i religious pilgrims annually hailing from around the world.

Sports
The city of Najaf is home to Al-Najaf SC and Naft Al-Wasat SC that play in the premier Iraq Stars League, and the second tier Iraqi Premier Division League, respectively.
Najaf has two football stadiums, the An-Najaf Stadium (also referred to as the old stadium) with a capacity of 12,000 spectators, and the newer Al-Najaf International Stadium with a capacity of 30,000. The latter stadium is the home of the Stars League club Al-Najaf as well as  Naft Al-Wasat, whilst the former is the home stadium of the neighbouring Al-Kufa SC.

Education
Universities
Some of the universities located in Najaf include:

Al-Furat Al-Awsat Technical University
Islamic University College
University of Alkafeel
Jabir Ibn Hayyan Medical University
Altoosi University College

Najaf Seminary
The Hawza of Najaf has been a centre of traditional Shia Islamic education since the 11th century CE. It was possibly established in the 9th century CE, making it the oldest Shi’i seminary among those still active, and many prominent Shi’i Islamic scholars have studied in the Najaf Seminary, including Murtadha al-Ansari, and Ali al-Sistani.

Infrastructure
Najaf International Airport is an important logistical hub that plays a pivotal role in facilitating transportation, particularly for religious tourism. Annually, it oversees the transit of over 3 million passengers, predominantly pilgrims visiting the holy sites in Najaf. It is situated in the eastern part of Najaf, approximately 6 kilometres from the city center.
In February 2024, the Iraqi National Investment Commission (NIC) unveiled a project to construct an inter-city high-speed rail connecting the cities of Najaf and Karbala. Once finished, it is set to accommodate up to 25,000 passengers per hour.
The construction of a road between the country and Saudi Arabia around the region of Najaf is about to complete.

International relations
Sister cities
As of 2024, Najaf has three sister cities:

 Minneapolis, United States
 Najafabad, Iran

See also
1977 Shia protests in Iraq
Al-Hannanah mosque
Al Najaf International Airport
Battle of Najaf (2003)
Battle of Najaf (2004)
Battle of Najaf (2007)
Big Four (Najaf)
Literary League Association

Notes
References
Further reading
Published in the 19th-20th centuries
Charles Wilson, ed. (1895), "Nejef", Handbook for Travellers in Asia Minor, Transcaucasia, Persia, etc., London: John Murray, ISBN 9780524062142, OCLC 8979039 {{citation}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Peters, John Punnett (1911). "Nejef" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 352.
Published in the 21st century
C. Edmund Bosworth, ed. (2007). "Najaf". Historic Cities of the Islamic World. Leiden: Koninklijke Brill. ISBN 978-9004153882.
Michael R. T. Dumper; Bruce E. Stanley, eds. (2007), "Najaf", Cities of the Middle East and North Africa, Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO (published 2008), ISBN 978-1576079195

External links

Miracles in Najaf
The Holy City of Najaf (Iraq)
Interactive Guide: Najaf - The Guardian


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 772
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nadjaf
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nadjaf (النجف en arabe ; aussi transcrite en « Najaf » ou « Najjaf ») est une ville d'Irak et la capitale de la province de Nadjaf. Elle est située à environ 160 km au sud de Bagdad. Sa population était estimée à 900 600 habitants en 2008.

Histoire
L'histoire de la ville remonte à l'ère pré-islamique. Le texte le plus ancien, qui décrit un établissement humain sur une colline à une dizaine de kilomètres de la rive droite de l'Euphrate, date de l'époque du roi Nabuchodonosor. Elle est alors parsemée de monastères et temples de l'ère chrétienne du royaume d'Al-Hîra, puis reprise par Ali ibn Abi Talib (Kufa) comme sa capitale.
Elle comprend la ville historique d'Al-Hîra (fondée Uni d'Al-Hîra depuis l'an 260 AD[pas clair]) qui est située à 18 km au sud de Nadjaf, ainsi que la ville historique de Kufa (7 km à l'est de Nadjaf).
Nadjaf est importante aussi en raison de l'existence de la ville d'Al-Hîra qui comprend de nombreux châteaux historiques comme le château d'Al-Khowarnak et le château d'Al-Sadair qui fut construit par les rois d'Al-Hîra il y a plus de 1 600 ans.
Après la découverte de la tombe présumée d'Ali, sous le califat abbasside, la ville devient un lieu de pèlerinage qui fait d'elle le troisième lieu saint de l'islam chiite.
Le traité d'Amasya, en 1555, transfère Nadjaf de la domination séfévide à celle des Ottomans.
Pendant la guerre d'Irak qui voit l'invasion du pays par une coalition dirigée par les États-Unis, la ville est le théâtre, à trois reprises, d'affrontements, en 2003, en 2004, puis en 2007 (en). En 2003, un attentat à la voiture piégée fait 82 morts devant le mausolée d'Ali.

Culture
La ville est un haut lieu de l'islam chiite et le centre du pouvoir politique chiite en Irak. Elle abrite notamment le mausolée d'Ali. Nadjaf est le quatrième lieu saint chiite, derrière La Mecque, Médine, Jérusalem et devant Kerbala. Sa hawza est la plus importante avec celle de Qom. Nadjaf et la région environnante sont riches en antiquités et trésors archéologiques datant de milliers d'années, en particulier dans la ville historique d'Al-Heera.

Le cimetière de Wadi al-Salam
Nadjaf possède la plus importante nécropole du monde, vieille de 1 400 ans, qui s'étend sur 6 kilomètres carrés, des millions de chiites y sont enterrés. On y compte plusieurs centaines d'enterrements par jour. Le cimetière de Wadi al-Salam (traduit par « la vallée de la paix ») est l'endroit où peuvent se faire enterrer tous les chiites du monde.

Sanctuaires
Le sanctuaire de l'imam Ali bin Abi Talib, ou mosquée Imam Ali ;
Le tombeau du prophète Hood, le sanctuaire du prophète Salih, le tombeau du prophète Noé et le tombeau du prophète Adam ;
La grande mosquée de Koufa et les tombeaux de Muslim bin Aqeel et de Hani bin Ourwah ;
Le sanctuaire de l'Imam Zaine El Abidine ;
Le sanctuaire de l'Imam al-Mahdi ;
Le sanctuaire de Mohammed bin Alhanafia bin Ali bin Abi Talib ;
Le sanctuaire de Rokaia (fille de Al-Imam Al-Hassein bin Ali).
Et plusieurs sanctuaires de Kufa, y compris :

Le sanctuaire de Muslim bin Aqeel ;
Le sanctuaire de Hani bin Ourwah ;
Le sanctuaire de garçons de Al-Imam Al-Kadhim ;
Le sanctuaire de Maitham al-Tamar ;
Le sanctuaire de Al-Mokhtar bin Abi Obaid Althagafi ;
Le sanctuaire de Rashid Alhujri ;
Le sanctuaire de Zaid bin Ali.

Économie
Nadjaf est reconnue pour son agriculture (culture du riz, du blé, des légumes, grâce à une hydrologie favorable), pour son industrie du vêtement, de l'or et pour son artisanat.
Nadjaf comprend également un centre d'élaboration de riz dans Michkhab (qui produit plusieurs variétés de riz irakiennes de qualité comme Anber ou Jassmine) et la culture du palmier et de plantes diverses.

Éducation
Nadjaf est une ville universitaire avec des écoles et un séminaire religieux, des dizaines d'universités, des instituts et des écoles religieuses, en plus de sept universités de l'Académie, comme l'université de Koufa, qui est considérée comme l'une des universités irakiennes les plus importantes, l'université de Alforat Alawsset de technique, ainsi que d'un certain nombre d'universités et d'instituts scientifiques et plusieurs grands hôpitaux.

Sport
Nadjaf a de nombreux centres culturels ainsi que quelques stades et grands clubs sportifs, y compris Nadjaf, Koufa et le club de Al-Khowarnak.

Personnalités liées
Abbas Akhoundi (né en 1957), homme politique iranien
Ahmed Al-Qoubandji (né en 1958), intellectuel musulman
Abbas Tabrizian (né en 1962), ayatollah iranien
Mohammad Aghazadeh Khorasani (1877-1937), religieux chiite

Articles connexes
Bataille de Nadjaf (2003)
Bataille de Nadjaf (2004)
Bataille de Nadjaf (2007) (en)

Notes et références
Liens externes

 Portail de l’Irak   Portail de l'islam


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 1,217
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Najaf
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Understand
The city covered by this article, usually referred to outside Iraq as "Najaf", in fact consists of two cities which, over the centuries, have grown until they joined together. These are Najaf, in the west, and Kufa (sometimes spelled Kufah), in the east. Both are considered holy by Shi'a Muslims, containing the graves of various important religious figures. Additionally, many key events in the lives of these figures took place in Najaf and/or Kufa. As such, the vast majority of visitors to Najaf are Shi'a pilgrims (referred to as Zuwwar in Arabic, or Za'ir in the singular), and they usually travel in groups, guided by a religious scholar. Nonetheless, independent travel is now also possible.

## Get in
There are several daily flights from the capital Baghdad as well as several cities in Iran with national carrier Iraqi Airways[dead link]. Additionally, there are a limited number of international flights from hubs such as Istanbul and Dubai.
31.98985344.4043171 Al Najaf International Airport (Southeast of the city centre).   (updated Jun 2021)
You can take shared taxis to/from Baghdad, Karbala, and other cities. Shared taxis to/from Karbala are 3,000 IQD (76km one way), to/from Nasiriyah are 15,000 IQD (256km one way), to/from Hillah are 7,500 IQD, and to/from Baghdad are 15,000 IQD (as of October 2022).
32.030944.325722 Najaf Northern Garage. This is the garage that north-bound (ex. to Baghdad) shared taxis leave from.    (updated Oct 2022)

## Get around
Careem (ridesharing app, owned by Uber) is available in Najaf, and takes international credit cards. Note that there are roadblocks around the Imam Ali Mosque which may require a "Careem Old City" service to get past (prices are pretty much the same as the regular Careem services though).

## See
Najaf is renowned as the site of the Tomb of Alī ibn Abī Tālib also known as "Imām Alī" the First Imam of Shia's, the cousin and son-in-law of the prophet Muhammad who is considered to be a righteous caliph by both the Shia and the Sunni. The city is now a great center of pilgrimage from throughout the Shi'a Islamic world. It is estimated that only Mecca and Medina receive more Muslim pilgrims. As the burial site of Shia Islam's second most important figure, the Imam Ali Mosque is considered by Shias as the third holiest Islamic site.
The Imam Ali Mosque is housed in a grand structure with a gold gilded dome and many precious objects in the walls. Nearby is the Wadi-us-Salaam cemetery, reputed to be the largest in the world. It contains the tombs of several prophets and many of the devout from around the world aspire to be buried here, to be raised from the dead with Imām Alī on Judgement Day. Over the centuries, numerous hospices, schools, libraries and Sufi convents were built around the shrine to make the city the centre of Shīʻa learning and theology.
The Najaf seminary is one of the most important teaching centres in the Islamic world. Ayatollah Khomeini lectured there from 1964–1978. Many of the leading figures of the new Islamic movement that emerged in Iraq, Iran and Lebanon in the 1970s had studied at Najaf.
The Afghan city of Mazar-e Sharif also has a site which claims to be Ali's tomb and draws many pilgrims, but Najaf's claim is more widely accepted.
31.69027844.4691671 Al-Qadisiyyah (About 60 kilometres south of Najaf). Historical city, infamous as the site of the battle in 636, which saw forces of the Rashidun Caliphate defeat the Persians sent by Rostam Farrokhzad, the dynast of the Sasanian Empire.
32.02861144.4008332 Great Mosque of Kufa. Aside from its architectural significance, this mosque is historically important as the site of the assassination of Imam Ali, in 661 AD (40 AH). Pilgrims pay their respects at the mihrab (niche facing Mecca) where he was prostrating when he was attacked from behind with a sword.   (updated Jun 2024)
31.9844.393 Ruins of Al-Hirah. Ancient city.   (updated Jun 2021)
31.994944.31944 Najaf Heritage Museum (متحف التراث النجفي). Housed in a historic khan, this heritage museum contains artifacts from rich history of Najaf as well as a special focus on the Iraqi revolt of 1920, a major revolt against British rule due to new land ownership and burial taxes in Najaf.  (updated Aug 2021)
32.00544.3155 Wadi-us-Salaam (وادي السلام). An Islamic cemetery, it is noted for being the largest cemetery in the world. Famous graves here include those of the Islamic prophets Hud and Salih, Shi'a scholars such as Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr and Allamah Tabatabai, and political/military leaders such as Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis.   (updated Jun 2024)
The countryside around Najaf is home to several khans, sometimes also called caravanserais. They were fortified roadside inns built to accommodate travelers overnight. Most of the more impressive ones are located on the historic route between Najaf and Karbala which served as an important trade and religious route.
32.316644.27446 Khan al-Nuss. A historic khan, a type of roadside inn, on the road between Najaf and Karbala.    (updated Aug 2021)

## Money
In busy areas, independent money changers set up small stands in the street. They usually offer a better exchange rate than "official" locations (such as at airports), and commonly sell local SIM cards as well.

## Souvenirs
The usual souvenirs from Najaf are tasbih (prayer beads), turbah (a small piece of clay which Shi'a Muslims prostate upon in prayer), and aqeeq (gemstone) rings. In areas frequented by pilgrims, you will find an abundance of small shops selling these.

## Drink
In busy areas of Najaf, there are stands selling small cups of black tea. These may cost as little as 250 Dinars, and can be served with or without sugar.

## Sleep
31.99126744.3166111 Al Sahla Land Hotel (فندق ارض السهلة), Al Rasool Rd, ☏ +964 780 007 7770.    (updated Feb 2019)
32.00166944.3315322 Zamzam Hotel, ☏ +964 750 908 4475.    (updated Mar 2017)
31.99480244.3119273 Qaser AlDeyafa Hotel, ☏ +964 771 001 0010.    (updated Mar 2017)
Qasr AlDur Hotel, ☏ +964 7801019019. Somewhat expensive by Iraqi standards, but the advantage of this hotel is that confirmations printed on its letterhead are definitely accepted at immigration for visas on arrival, whereas some pilgrims have reported problems when trying to use confirmations from smaller hotels. (updated Jun 2024)

## Stay safe
Nonetheless, Najaf is one of the safest cities in Iraq. As the city is almost entirely Shi'a, ISIS and al-Qaeda have never had any popular support here. There is an extensive network of (highly effective) military and police checkpoints to keep out any would-be infiltrators, especially around areas of interest to pilgrims and tourists (such as mosques and shrines). Expect to be patted down several times before entering the inner part of a shrine.

## Respect
Najaf is a holy city in Shi'a Islam, and therefore very conservative, even by Middle Eastern standards. Unlike in some of Iraq's more liberal cities, do not bother looking for alcohol here. Women are expected to wear Iranian-style chadors.

## Go next
Most visitors to Najaf are Shi'a pilgrims. The pilgrimage to Iraq is called Ziyarah in Arabic, and a "complete" Ziyarah will involve visiting Karbala, Kadhimain (in Baghdad), and Samarra after Najaf, as these are the burial sites of other Imams (the twelve successors of the Prophet Muhammad, in Shi'a Islam). Other, comparatively minor, pilgrimage sites in Iraq include Hillah and Balad.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
IMAM ALI SHRINE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: religious_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:35:33


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,892
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imam_Ali_Shrine
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Imam Ali Shrine (Arabic: حَرَم ٱلْإِمَام عَلِيّ, romanized: Ḥaram al-ʾImām ʿAlī), also known as the Mosque of Ali (Arabic: مَسْجِد عَلِيّ, romanized: Masjid ʿAlī), is a Shi'ite mosque and shrine, located in Najaf, in the Najaf Governorate of Iraq. The site is a mausoleum which Shia and Sunni Muslims believe contains the tomb of Ali ibn Abi Talib, a cousin, son-in-law and companion of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. The Shias consider Ali as their first imam and the first of the twelve caliphs of Muhammad, and the Sunnis regard him as the fourth Sunni Rashid Caliph. According to Shia belief, buried next to Ali within this mosque are the remains of Adam and Nuh (Noah). Each year, millions of pilgrims visit the shrine and pay tribute to Imam Ali.
The shrine monument has been built and rebuilt numerous times throughout history.

History
The Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid built the first structure over the tomb of Imam Ali in 786 CE, which included a green dome. The Abbasid caliph al-Mutawakkil flooded the site in 850, but in the 10th century Abu'l-Hayja, the Hamdanid ruler of Mosul and Aleppo, rebuilt the shrine in 923, which included a large dome. In 979–980, the Shi'ite Buyid emir 'Adud al-Dawla expanded the shrine, which included a cenotaph over the burial site and a new dome. This included hanging textiles and carpets. He also protected Najaf with a wall and citadel, while providing water from the Euphrates via a qanat.
The Seljuq sultan Malik-Shah I contributed large gifts to the shrine in 1086, as did Caliph Al-Nasir.
The vizier Shams al-Din Juvayni added facilities to serve the pilgrims in 1267, and the sultan Ghazan Khan added the Dar al-Siyada wing for the sayyids in 1303.
Ibn Battuta visited the shrine in 1326, noting that it was "carpeted with various sorts of carpets of silk and other materials, and contains candelabra of gold and silver, large and small." Between the three tombs, "are dishes of gold and silver, containing rose-water, musk and various kinds of perfumes. The visitor dips his hand in this and anoints his face with it for a blessing." A fire destroyed the shrine in 1354, but it was rebuilt around 1358 by the Jalairid sultan Shaikh Awais Jalayir. He also interred his father's remains, Hasan Buzurg in the courtyard. Timur ordered the restoration of the shrine after a visit to Najaf. Suleiman the Magnificent also offered gifts, which probably helped restore the shrine, after a visit in 1534. The Safavid Shah Ismail I visited in 1508, but it was Abbas I who visited Najaf twice and commissioned 500 men to rebuild the shrine in 1623. The restoration was completed by his grandson Shah Safi al-Din in 1632. This restoration included a new dome, expanded courtyard, a hospital, kitchen, and hospice, so as to accommodate the numerous pilgrims. The cenotaph was restored in 1713 and the dome stabilized in 1716.
In 1742, Nader Shah gilded the dome and minaret, and this was chronicled by Nasrallah al-Haeri in his famous poem, iḏhā ḍhāmak al-dahra yawman wa jārā (Arabic: إذا ضامك الدهر يوماً وجارا). Nader Shah's wife paid for the walls and courtyard to be rebuilt and the retiling of the iwan faience. In 1745, the iwan was rebuilt as a gilt muqarnas of nine tiers. In 1791, a raised stone floor covered the tombs in the courtyard, creating a cellar space for them.
The first European visitors included Carsten Niebuhr in 1765, William Loftus in 1853, and Johann Ludwig Burckhardt in 1864.  The Ottoman emperor Abdülaziz rebuilt the Clock Portal (Bab al-Sa'a) and the Portal of Muslim Ibn 'Aqil in 1863 and the former gilded in 1888 by the Qajar sultan Naser al-Din Shah Qajar. In 1886, Sultan Naser al-Din, also repaired the dome because there were breaks in it due to the weather.

Independent Iraq
During the uprising of March 1991, following the Persian Gulf War, Saddam Hussein's Republican Guards damaged the shrine, where members of the Shia opposition were cornered, in storming the shrine and massacring virtually all its occupants. Afterwards, the shrine was closed for two years, officially for repairs. Saddam Hussein also deported to Iran a large number of the residents of the area who were of Iranian descent.
In the three years after the 2003 invasion of Iraq by the U.S. military, a number of violent incidents occurred at the mosque:

April 10, 2003: former Saddam Hussein era custodian Haydar Al-Killidar Al-Rufaye and anti-Saddam Shia leader Sayed Abdul Majid al-Khoei, the son of Grand Ayatollah Abu al Qasim al-Khoei, were killed by a mob near the mosque. Al-Khoei had returned from exile in Britain to encourage cooperation with the U.S.-led occupation of Iraq.
August 29, 2003: the 2003 Imam Ali Shrine bombing. A car bomb exploded outside the mosque just as the main Friday prayers were ending. Somewhere between 85 and 125 people were killed, including the influential Ayatollah Sayed Mohammed Baqir al-Hakim, the Shia leader of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq. The blast is thought to be the work of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi.
May 24, 2004: unidentified mortar fire hit the shrine, damaging gates which lead to the tomb of Imam Ali.
August 5, 2004: Muqtada al-Sadr and the Mahdi Army seized the mosque and used it as a military base for launching attacks against the Iraqi police, the provincial government and coalition forces. The fighting was eventually ended by a peace agreement. Neighbouring buildings suffered considerable damage, but the mosque itself suffered only superficial damage from stray bullets and shrapnel.
August 10, 2006: a suicide bomber blew himself up near the shrine, killing 40 people and injuring more than 50 others.

Architecture and decoration
Numerous structures have existed over the tomb of Imam Ali since its discovery during the rule of Harun al Rashid in the 8th century.   The current structure though dates back to the Safavid period in the 17th century and was designed by the famous polymath Baha' al-din al-'Amili. The shrine consists of the central tomb chamber topped by a large double shell onion-shaped dome 42 metres (138 ft) high, and flanked by twin 38-metre-tall (125 ft) minarets. The inner shell of the dome is visible from the inside of the tomb chamber while the monumental outer shell is visible from the courtyard of the shrine and throughout the city. The inside of the tomb chamber and its surrounding halls are ornamented with an array of mirror mosaics, most of which has been replaced over the years and are not original. The ceramic mosaics that adorn the inner shell of the dome however are original and date back to the original construction of the shrine during the Safavid period. At the front of the shrine stands a large golden iwan flanked by two minarets. The monumental dome, iwan, and minarets are adorned with gold coated copper plates, though they were originally adorned with green and blue ceramic tiles in the typical Safavid fashion. The gilding of the shrines dome and façade elements occurred in 1743 under the orders of the Iranian king Nader Shah Afshar and his wife Razia Begum. The golden iwan, dome, and minarets contains numerous inscriptions in Persian, Arabic, and Azeri Turkish with poems in praise of Ali ibn Abi Talib inscriptions chronicling the gilding of the shrine by Nader Shah. The left and right side walls of the shrine are ornamented with cuerda seca tile panels most of which date from either the 18th or 19th centuries. Imam Ali's shrine is among the last of the Shi'ite shrines in Iraq to retains its nearly full set of original antique tiles.
Around the shrine on its North, East, and Southern sides is a large courtyard surrounded by pointed arch arcades, while the shrine is linked on the West to the Al-Ra's Mosque. The courtyard arcades are two floors in height and contain various small chambers historically used as dormitory rooms for seminary students, today most are used as administrative offices. The Al-Ras mosque (literally "The Head Mosque") is oriented in the direction of the head of Ali Ibn Abi Talib's grave. The original Al-Ras mosque is said to have dated from the Ilhanate period in 14th century however it was demolished in 2005 by the shrine's administration and rebuilt in a modern style using contemporary construction materials and methods. Local architectural historians and preservationists have argued the destruction of the original Al-Ras mosque destroyed an important part of the shrine's architectural heritage and the introduction of modern construction methods and materials has damaged the architectural integrity of the shrine. The original Ilkhanate era mihrab of the Al-Ras mosque underwent restoration in 2023 after having been kept in storage for 18 years and will be put on display in the shrine's museum.
Entrance to the shrine is through three main monumental iwans on the eastern, northern and southern sides, called the Main or Clock Portal, al-Tusi Portal and the Qibla Portal respectively. There are two additional monumental portals, the Portal of Muslim Ibn 'Aqil, north of the Clock Gate, and the al-'Amara, or al-Faraj Portal, at the southwestern corner. The most notable of these entry portals is the Clock Portal (Iwan-i-Sa'at) and is topped by a tall clock tower ornamented with mosaic tiles. The clock mechanism and its bells were produced in Manchester, England and brought to the shrine in 1887, this is visible on iron engravings on the bells.

Religious status and precincts
As the burial site of one of Islam's most important figures, the Shrine of Imam Ali is considered by all Shia Muslims as the fourth holiest Islamic site. The Boston Globe reported "for the Muslim Shias, Najaf is the fourth holiest city, behind Mecca and Medina in Saudi Arabia and Al-Aqsa Mosque in Palestine." It is estimated that only Karbala, Mecca, and Medina receive more Muslim pilgrims. A hadith attributed to Ja'far as-Sādiq, the Sixth Imami Shī'ite Imām, mentions the site as one of "five definitive holy places that we respect very much".
The site is visited annually by at least 8 million pilgrims on average, which is estimated to increase to 20 million in years to come. Many Shiites believe that Ali did not want his grave to be desecrated by his enemies and consequently asked his friends and family to bury him secretly. This secret gravesite is supposed to have been revealed later during the Abbasid Caliphate by as-Sādiq. Most Shī'ites accept that Ali is buried in Imām Ali Mosque, in what is now the city of Najaf, which grew around the shrine.
As-Sādiq said that Imam Ali Mosque is the third of five holiest Islamic sites: Mecca, Medina, Imam Ali Mosque in Najaf, Imam Husayn Shrine in Karbalā, and the Shrine of his daughter Fāṭimah in Qom.

"God chose that land [Najaf] as the abode of the Prophets. I swear to God that no one more honourable than the Commander of the Believers [Ali] has ever lived there after (the time of) his purified fathers, Ādam and Nuh."

Gallery
See also
Holiest sites in Shia Islam
List of mosques in Iraq
Shia Islam in Iraq

References
External links

"Holy Shrine of Imam Ali". wikishia.net.
"Imam Ali Holy Shrine". Imam Hussain.org.
"History of the Shrine of Ali". imamreza.net. Archived from the original on June 20, 2010.
"Past and current history of the mosque". GlobalSecurity.org.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
KARBALA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:35:41


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 3,003
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karbala
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Karbala is a major city in central Iraq. It is the capital of Karbala Governorate. With an estimated population of 691,100 people in 2024, Karbala is the second largest city in central Iraq, after Baghdad. The city is located about 100 km (62 mi) southwest of Baghdad, and a few miles east of Lake Milh, also known as Razzaza Lake. Karbala is one of the main political, spiritual and cultural hubs of Shi'a Islam.
The city, best known as the location of the battle of Karbala in 680 AD between Husayn ibn Ali and his band of several dozen followers, including some armed women, and several thousand soldiers led by General Umar ibn Sa'd on behalf of Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad, the local governor. With presence of the shrines of Hussain and Abbas, Karbala is considered a holy city for  Muslims. Soon, Karbala emerged as an important center of pilgrimage for Shiite Muslims across the world. During the Abbasid era, the city witnessed many events. After the fall of Baghdad in 1258, Karbala came under the control of Mongolian Empire led by Hulegu Khan. The city continued to be under multiple successive empires.
Tens of millions of Shi'ite Muslims visit the site twice a year. The martyrdom of Husayn ibn 'Ali and Abbas ibn 'Ali 
is commemorated annually by nearly 100 million Shi'ites in the city. Up to 34 million pilgrims visit the city to observe ʿĀshūrāʾ (the tenth day of Muharram), which marks the anniversary of Husayn's death, but the main event is the Arbaʿeen (the 40th day after 'Ashura'), where up to 40 million visit the graves. Most of the pilgrims travel on foot and come from all around Iraq and more than 56 countries.

Etymology
There are many opinions among different investigators, as to the origin of the word Karbala. Some have pointed out that Karbala has a connection to the "Karbalato" language, while others attempt to derive the meaning of word by analyzing its spelling and language. They conclude that it originates from the "Kar Babel" group of ancient Babylonian villages that included Nainawa, Al-Ghadiriyya, Karbella (or Karb Illu), Al-Nawaweess, and Al-Heer. This last name is today known as Al-Hair and is where Husayn ibn Ali's grave is located.
The investigator Yaqut al-Hamawi had pointed out that the meaning of Karbala could have several explanations, one of which is that the place where Husayn ibn Ali was martyred is made of soft earth—al-Karbalāt.
Another theory suggests that this word originates from the Assyrian language and is a combination of two terms: "karb" (meaning proximity or sanctuary / cherub and cherubim) and "ila" (meaning God), thus signifying "sanctuary of God" or "house of God." According to another theory, the word means "great karb," and the element "la" in it should be compared to the ancient "La\Lu" component found in Mesopotamian words (such as the word "Lugal"). In Shi'a Islamic tradition, there are also two hadiths from Ali ibn Abi Talib and the Prophet of Islam that establish a connection between Karbala and the concepts of "karb" (distress) and "bala" (affliction) in the first narration, as well as the event of Noah's flood—which is referred to in the Qur'an as "great karb"—in the second narration.
According to Shia's belief, the archangel Gabriel narrated the true meaning of the name Karbala to Muhammad: a combination of karb (Arabic: كَرْب, "the land which will cause many agonies") and balāʾ (Arabic: بَلاء, "afflictions").

History
Religious significance
Mesopotamia has been mentioned in Quran. Some Shi'ites consider this verse of the Quran to refer to Iraq, the land of the Shi'ite sacred sites of Kufah, Najaf, Karbala, Kadhimiyyah and Samarra, since the Monotheistic preachers Ibrāhīm (Abraham) and Lūṭ (Lot), who are regarded as Prophets in Islam, are believed to have lived in the ancient Iraqi city of Kutha Rabba, before going to "The Blessed Land".
Then We delivered him(Ibrahim), along with Lot, to the land We had showered with blessings for all people.
Aside from the story of Abraham and Lot in Polytheistic Mesopotamia, there are passages in the Quran about Mount Judi, Babil ("Babylon") and Qaryat Yunus ("Town of Jonah").
The tomb of the martyred Imam has acquired great significance in Shia tradition because he and his fellow martyrs are seen as models of jihad in the way of God. Shi'ites believe that Karbala is one of the holiest places on Earth according to the following traditions (among others):
The angel Gabriel narrated to Muhammad that:

Karbala, where your grandson and his family will be martyred, is one of the most blessed and the most sacred lands on Earth, and it is one of the valleys of Paradise.
The fourth Shi'ite Imam, that is Zayn al-Abidin narrated:

God chose the land of Karbalā' as a safe and blessed sanctuary twenty-four thousand years before He created the land of the Ka'bah and chose it as a sanctuary. Verily it (Karbala) will shine among the gardens of Paradise like a shining star shines among the stars for the people of Earth.
In this regard, Ja'far al-Sadiq narrates, 'Allah, the Almighty, has made the dust of my ancestor's grave – Imam Husain (a.s) as a cure for every sickness and safety from every fear.' It is narrated from Ja'far that: "The earth of the pure and holy grave of Husayn ibn ‘Ali (a.s) is a pure and blessed musk. For those who consume it, it is a cure for every ailment, and if our enemy uses it then he will melt the way fat melts, when you intend to consume that pure earth recite the following supplication"

Battle of Karbala
The Battle of Karbala was fought on the bare deserts on the way to Kufa on October 10, 680 AD (10 Muharram 61 AH). Both Husayn ibn Ali and his brother Abbas ibn Ali were buried by the local Banī Asad tribe, at what later became known as the Mashhad Al-Husayn. The battle itself occurred as a result of Husain's refusal of Yazid's demand for allegiance to his caliphate. The Kufan governor, Ubaydallah ibn Ziyad, sent thirty thousand horsemen against Husayn as he traveled to Kufa. Husayn had no army, he was with his family and few friends who joined them, so there were around 73 men, including the 6-month-old Ali Asghar, son of Imam Husayn, in total. The horsemen, under 'Umar ibn Sa'd, were ordered to deny Husayn and his followers water to force Husayn to agree to give an oath of allegiance. On the 9th of Muharram, Husayn refused, and requested to be given the night to pray. On the 10th day of Muharram, Husayn ibn Ali prayed the morning prayer and led his troops into battle along with his brother Abbas. Many of Husayn's followers, including all of his present sons Ali Akbar, Ali Asghar (six months old) and his nephews Qassim, Aun and Muhammad were killed.
In 63 AH (683 AD), Yazid ibn Mu'awiya released the surviving members of Husayn's family from prison as there was a threat of uprisings and some of the people in his court were unaware of who the battle was with, when they got to know that the descendants of Muhammad were killed, they were horrified. On their way to Mecca, they stopped at the site of the battle. There is a record of Sulayman ibn Surad going on pilgrimage to the site as early as 65 AH (685 AD). The city began as a tomb and shrine to Husayn ibn Ali, grandson of Muhammad and son of Ali ibn Abi Talib, and grew as a city to meet the needs of pilgrims. The city and tombs were greatly expanded by successive Muslim rulers, but suffered repeated destruction from attacking armies. The original shrine was destroyed by the Abbasid Caliph Al-Mutawakkil in 850 but was rebuilt in its present form around 979, only to be partly destroyed by fire in 1086 and rebuilt yet again.

Early modern
During the period of Ottoman Iraq, Karbala, like Najaf, suffered from severe water shortages that were only resolved in the early 18th century by building a dam at the head of the Husayniyya Canal. In 1737, the city replaced Isfahan in Iran as the main center of Shia scholarship. In the mid-eighteenth century it was dominated by the dean of scholarship, Yusuf Al Bahrani, a key proponent of the Akhbari tradition of Shia thought, until he died in 1772, after which the more state-centric Usuli school became more influential.
The Wahhabi sack of Karbala occurred on 21 April 1802 (1216 Hijri) (1801), under the rule of Abdul-Aziz bin Muhammad the second ruler of the First Saudi State, when 12,000 Wahhabi Muslims from Najd attacked the city of Karbala. The attack was coincident with the anniversary of Ghadir Khum event, or 10 Muharram. This fight left 3,000–5,000 deaths and the dome of the tomb of Husayn ibn Ali, was destroyed. The fight lasted for 8 hours.
After the First Saudi State invasion, the city enjoyed semi-autonomy during Ottoman rule, governed by a group of gangs and mafia variously allied with members of the 'ulama. In order to reassert their authority, the Ottoman army laid siege to the city. On January 13, 1843, Ottoman troops entered the city. Many of the city leaders fled leaving defense of the city largely to tradespeople. About 3,000 Arabs were killed in the city, and another 2,000 outside the walls (this represented about 15% of the city's normal population). The Turks lost 400 men. This prompted many students and scholars to move to Najaf, which became the main Shia religious centre. Between 1850 and 1903, Karbala enjoyed a generous influx of money through the Oudh Bequest. The Shia-ruled Indian Province of Awadh, known by the British as Oudh, had always sent money and pilgrims to the holy city. The Oudh money, 10 million rupees, originated in 1825 from the Awadh Nawab Ghazi-ud-Din Haider. One third was to go to his wives, and the other two-thirds went to holy cities of Karbala and Najaf. When his wives died in 1850, the money piled up with interest in the hands of the British East India Company. The EIC sent the money to Karbala and Najaf per the wives' wishes, in the hopes of influencing the Ulama in Britain's favor. This effort to curry favor is generally considered to have been a failure.

In 1915, Karbala was the scene of an uprising against the Ottoman Empire. In 1928, an important drainage project was carried out to relieve the city of unhealthy swamps, formed between Hussainiya and the Bani Hassan Canals on the Euphrates.
Defense of the City Hall in Karbala – a series of skirmishes fought from April 3 to April 6, 2004, between the Iraqi rebels of the Mahdi Army trying to conquer the city hall and the defending Polish and Bulgarian soldiers from the Multinational Division Central-South
In 2003 following the American invasion, the Karbala town council attempted to elect United States Marine Corps Lieutenant Colonel Matthew Lopez as mayor. Ostensibly so that his Marines, contractors, and funds could not leave.
On April 14, 2007, a car bomb exploded about 600 ft (180 m) from the shrine to Husayn, killing 47 and wounding over 150.
On January 19, 2008, 2 million Iraqi Shia pilgrims marched through Karbala city, Iraq to commemorate Ashura. 20,000 Iraqi troops and police guarded the event amid tensions due to clashes between Iraqi troops and Shia which left 263 people dead (in Basra and Nasiriya).

Geography
With an impressive 3.9 million palm trees, Karbala produces approximately 160,000 tons of dates across 90 different varieties. Karbala has surpassed Saudi Arabia's Al-Ahsa Oasis, becoming the world's largest palm oasis.

Climate
Karbala experiences a hot desert climate (BWh in the Köppen climate classification) with extremely hot, long, dry summers and mild winters. Almost all of the yearly precipitation is received between November and April, though no month is wet.

Economy
Karbala is a significant pilgrimage destination for Shia Muslims, especially during the Islamic holy month of Muharram. According to Azher Al-Kalash, Vice President of the Association of Hotels and Tourist Restaurants in Karbala, said, "Karbala has the highest number of hotels in Iraq, with 900 hotels of various levels, equivalent to one-third of the total number of hotels in the entire country. Some hotels have safety and security concerns raised by the civil defense, but the most comply with the regulations and instructions."
Tourism in every country is influenced by supply and demand. Hence, hotel and transportation prices rise during peak times. In Karbala, the minimum hotel rate is around $10 per night, while the maximum can reach $50 during Ashura. However, the amount doubles during the Arbaeen pilgrimage due to the high demand. Arbaeen is the most significant pilgrimage that hotel owners rely on throughout the year." Thus, tourism plays an important role in stimulating various sectors, whether hotels, agriculture, trade, or others. It contributes to the employment of all economic sectors of society.
Karbala Refinery, with a refining capacity of 140,000 barrels per day (bpd), it stands as Iraq's largest refining project in four decades. The refinery commenced commercial operations in mid-March 2024, initially operating at 60% capacity, with plans to reach full capacity by August 2024. It is estimated that the refinery produce 70% of country's petroleum products and generate $3bn in revenue.

Culture
Religious tourism
Karbala, alongside Najaf, is considered a thriving tourist destination for Shia Muslims and the tourism industry in the city boomed after the end of Saddam Hussein's rule. Some religious tourism attractions include:

Al Abbas Mosque
Imam Husayn Shrine
Euphrates
Ruins of Mujada, about 40 km (25 miles) to the west of the city
Arbaeen is a massive annual pilgrimage event that takes place in Karbala. It is considered one of the largest peaceful gatherings in the world. In 2017, approximately 30 million people took part in the pilgrimage.
The official number of visitors during the 10-day period surpassed 22 million people on September 6, 2023, making it the largest and most peaceful gathering in the world. Shia Muslims largely attended the commemoration, as well as many Sunni Muslims and Christians who also visited to pay their respect to Imam Hussein.
Who Is Hussain, a charity is based in Karbala, has accumulated around 50,000 blood donations, saved more than 140,000 lives and helped feed more than 700,000 people. During the period of Arbaeen, its teams provide voluntary initiatives around the world like donating blood, alongside distributing food, drink and masks to citizens, to countries including the United States, France, Britain, Pakistan, Lebanon as well as African and poverty-driven countries.”

Sports
Karbala FC is a football club based in Karbala. It plays in the premier Iraq Stars League, the highest division of the Iraqi football league system.
The Karbala Sports City located south of Karbala city, is a large sports complex housing the Karbala International Stadium with a capacity of 30,000 spectators, a smaller football stadium with a capacity of 2,000, as well as a football field for training, a swimming hall, and a hotel.

Education
Universities
University of Karbala, which was inaugurated on March 1, 2002, is one of the top most universities in Iraq regarding academic administration, human resources, and scientific research. Ahl al-Bayt University was founded in September 2003 by Dr. Mohsen Baqir Mohammed-Salih Al-Qazwini. The university has six major colleges: College of Law, Arts, Islamic Sciences, Medical & Health Technology, Pharmacy and Dentistry.
Warith al-Anbiya University in Karbala, sponsored by the Imam Husayn Holy Shrine, was established in 2017. It has the faculties of engineering, administration, economics, law and pathology. It received its first batch of students in the academic year 2017–2018.

Hawza Seminary
The Hawza are Islamic education institutions that are administered under the guidance of a Grand Ayatollah or group of scholars to teach Shia Muslims and guide them through the rigorous journey of becoming an Alim (a religious scholar). Initially Karbala's hawza consisted mostly of Iranians and Turkish scholars. The death of Sharif-ul-Ulama Mazandarani in 1830 as well as the repression of the Shia population by the Ottomans in 1843 both played a significant role in the relocation of many scholars to the city of Najaf, where a large Hawza had already existed. This move strengthened the role of the Hawza of Najaf as the center of Shia Islamic leadership and education. Today the Hawza Seminary still exists in Karbala (such as the School of Allamah Ibn Fahd) but to a lesser extent in comparison to Najaf.

Infrastructure
Airports
Airports in Karbala include:

Karbala Northeast Airport
Karbala International Airport (located to the southeast of Karbala)

Inter-city high-speed railway system
In February 2024, the Iraqi National Investment Commission (NIC) unveiled a project to construct an inter-city high-speed rail connecting the cities of Karbala and Najaf. Once finished, it is set to accommodate up to 25,000 passengers per hour.

International relations
Sister cities
As of 2020, Karbala has 2 sister cities:

 Mashhad, Iran
 Tabriz, Iran

See also
Battle of Karbala
1977 Shia uprising in Iraq
Battle of Karbala (1991)
Battle of Karbala (2003)
2003 Karbala bombings
2004 Ashura massacre
2007 Karbala mosque bombings
Karbala raid
Arba'een
Karbala, Iran

Explanatory notes
References
Further reading
Published in the 19th century
Louis de Sivry, ed. (1859). "Karbala". Dictionnaire geographique, historique, descriptif, acheologique des pèlerinages anciens et modernes (in French). Paris.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)

Published in the 20th century
Peters, John Punnett (1911). "Kerbela" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 15 (11th ed.). pp. 753–754.

Published in the 21st century
C. Edmund Bosworth, ed. (2007). "Karbala". Historic Cities of the Islamic World. Leiden: Koninklijke Brill.
Michael R.T. Dumper; Bruce E. Stanley, eds. (2008), "Karbala", Cities of the Middle East and North Africa, Santa Barbara, USA: ABC-CLIO

External links

Shia Shrines of Karbala – Sacred Destinations
Shia Karbala Poetry. Archived 6 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine.
Karbala – A Lesson for Mankind (archived)
Karbala Quotes and Sayings
Karbala and Martyrdom Archived 2021-05-12 at the Wayback Machine
Karbala – The Facts and the Fairy-tales
Karbala, the Chain of Events


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 456
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerbala
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kerbala (arabe : Karbalāʾ, كربلاء ; aussi transcrite « Karbala » ou « Kerbela »), qui étymologiquement signifie « Terre de la souffrance et du croisement des sabres » (كربلاء), est une ville d'Irak, située à 100 km au sud-ouest de Bagdad. Sa population en 2003 était de 572 300 habitants. Elle atteint en 2018 1,2 million. Elle est la capitale de la province de Karbala.
Les chiites la considèrent comme leur cinquième lieu saint, après La Mecque, Médine, Jérusalem et Nadjaf, et chaque année on y commémore l'Achoura et l'Arbaïn, au cours d'importantes cérémonies rappelant la décapitation d'Hussein, en 680.

Histoire
La bataille de Kerbala
À la suite des tensions concernant la succession du califat, les Omeyyades ont défait à Kerbala, le 10 octobre 680, l'armée d'Al-Hussein ibn Ali, petit-fils de Mahomet, lors de la bataille dite de Kerbala, C'est un des événements fondateurs du chiisme. C'est là que Hussein fut décapité par les soldats du calife Yazid Ier. Hussein avait précédemment refusé de prêter allégeance à ce dernier, après quoi il avait quitté la Mecque en direction l’Irak, accompagné de sa famille, pour rejoindre Koufa.

Fondation de la ville
À cette époque, la ville n'existait pas encore : ce sont les générations suivantes qui la bâtirent, afin d'accueillir les pèlerins qui venaient se recueillir sur le site de la bataille et dans la mosquée construite à cet endroit, le mashhad d'al-Hussein. On trouve la première mention de ce monument en 977.
En 1555, le traité d'Amasya transfère Kerbala, ainsi que Nadjaf, de la domination séfévide à celle des Ottomans tout en garantissant le maintien du pèlerinage chiite.

Pillage du mausolée
Le 21 avril 1802, Abdelaziz ben Saoud à la tête des wahhabites envahit l'Irak et pille Kerbala. Iconoclastes, ils y détruisent des sanctuaires, dont celui d'Al-Hussein ibn Ali, ainsi que son tombeau. Entre 2 000 et 3 000 habitants sont tués.

Bataille de Kerbala
Lors de la guerre d'Irak, d'intenses combats urbains dans la ville ont opposé l'armée irakienne à la Coalition américaine au début du mois d'avril 2003.

Commémorations
L'Achoura et l'Arbaïn constituent l'un des plus grands rassemblements religieux au monde avec environ vingt millions de musulmans, venus des quatre coins de l'Irak mais aussi de plusieurs pays musulmans (Iran, Pakistan, Inde, Liban, péninsule Arabique, Turquie, Syrie, Afghanistan), et même de plus loin. Ils sont  accueillis par la population locale qui leur offre repas et hébergement. Les chiites posent leur front à l'endroit même où Hussein a été décapité.
L'importance sociale et culturel de l'Arbaïn a valu à l'événement d'être intégré par l'UNESCO, en 2019, à la liste représentative du patrimoine culturel immatériel de l’humanité.

Personnalités
Saddeq Shirazi (né en 1942), ayatollah irakien d'origine perse.

Notes et références
Liens externes

 Portail de l’Irak


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 941
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Karbala
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Karbala (Arabic: كربلاء‎‎) is a city in Southern Iraq. It is considered one of the holiest cities in the country.

## Understand
Karbala is one of the holiest cities in Shi'a Islam. In the Battle of Karbala, the Prophet Muhammad's grandson Husayn was slain. To pay respects to the martyr Husayn, Shi'a Muslims visit the Imam Husayn Shrine, the biggest tourist attraction in Karbala, every year during a pilgrimage called Arbaeen.

## Get in
Most travelers enter the city by bus or by car as the city does not yet have a functioning airport. Due to its religious importance, cities all across Iraq has regular bus services. The entrance to the city is well protected and check points are working hard on every single car that gets into the city. There are one or two trains each week from Baghdad and Basra. Extra trains are available on special occasions.
The Downtown Area is closed off and the entry of vehicles into the area of 1.5 km around the holy shrines is forbidden except for security, the shrines' personnel and residents. Anyone else who wants to get in must put their car in a parking and get in either via the holy shrine buses or on foot.
32.67826344.0773651 Karbala railway station (8 km northeast of central Karbala, along Highway 9).    (updated Oct 2019)

## By plane
A new dedicated airport is under construction, but as of late 2020 it is unclear when it will open. The nearest major international airport is in Baghdad.
32.36644.19362 Karbala International Airport. Future airport dedicated to pilgrims.   (updated Oct 2020)

## See
There are also a lot of religious places around the Holy Shrines of Imam Hussen and Abu Al-fadhl Al-Abbas.
32.61636544.0323131 Imam Hussein Holy Shrine (مقام الامام الحسين). One of the holiest sites in Shia Islam, it contatins the grave of Hussein ibn Ali, grandson of the prophet Muhammad.      (updated Nov 2018)
32.61718944.0362172 Al Abbas Mosque (مسجد الامام العباس, Masjid al-‘Abbās). The mausoleum of ‘Abbās ibn ‘Alī, located across from the Imām Husayn Mosque. ‘Abbās was the half-brother of Hasan and Husayn, and was the flag-bearer for Husayn in the Battle of Al-Taff. The majority of the design was done by Persian and Central Asian architects. The central pear shaped dome is an ornately decorated structure with two tall minarets on its sides. The tomb is covered with pure gold and surrounded by a trellis of silver, along with Iranian carpets rolled out on the floors.      (updated Nov 2018)
Hadrat Abbas Shrine. Historical building, the burial place of the brave son of Imam Ali (AS), and half-brother of Imam Hussein. The shrine is especially revered by the Shia who visit it every year, in the month of Muharram, and various other times of the year, to honour his legendary martyrdom in the Battle of Al-Taff. (updated Nov 2018)
32.651343.9853 Al-Hurr ibn Yazid Al-Tamimi Mosque. Shrine dedicated to Al-Hurr ibn Yazid Al-Tamimi.  (updated Jul 2021)

## Outside the city
The areas around Karbala are rich in heritage and archaeological sites. A few sites have at least basic services for tourists, while you are left on your own when visiting others.
32.51659943.7971724 Imam Ali's Dropper Shrine. A small spring, said to have been brought to life by Imam Ali, and a mosque.  (updated Oct 2020)
32.497543.5752785 Al-Aqiser (الأقيصر). An archeological site in Ayn al-Tamr near Karbala that has been described as the oldest eastern Christian Church. In 2019, prayers were again said in the ruins of the church by Assyrians of the Chaldean Catholic Church.   (updated Dec 2020)
32.462643.71176 Simeon's Palace (قصر شمعون الأثري). Ruins of a palace dating back to the pre-Islamic period.  (updated Aug 2021)
32.481843.77937 Tar Caves (كهوف الطار). Large cave complex that has been inhabited since prehistoric times.  (updated Aug 2021)
32.47353644.1588518 Al-Rubu' Caravansarai (خان الربع) (16 km south of Karbala, along road 9 towards Najaf). Also known as Khan al-Nukhaylah, this historical caravansarai dates back to the Ottoman era. The site has hosted cultural festivals from time to time.      (updated Feb 2020)
32.349844.0179 Khan al-Atshan. Ruins of a historic castle dating back to the 8th century.     (updated Aug 2021)
32.4405343.60249310 Al-Ukhaidir Fortress (50 km southwest of Karbala, along road 22). A prime example of Abbasid architecture, built in 775 AD. The fortress has been a candidate for UNESCO World Heritage since 2000.      (updated Nov 2018)
32.3487343.80424411 Ruins of Mujada (40 km southwest, into the desert). Historic ruin located to the west of the city. The ruins sit in the middle of the desert, around 40 km (25 mi) away from the city. The ruin is cylindrical shaped, and it reaches more than 30 m (98 ft) from sea level. The origin of the ruins is unknown.   (updated Oct 2020)
32.640844.08112 White bridge. Historic bridge across the Al-Husseiniya river, built in 1550.  (updated Jul 2021)

## Buy
You can buy khak-e-shifa. Some Shi'a Muslims consider it sacred and miraculous, and claim diseases can be treated with it.

## Eat
The restaurants are spread all around the city, especially downtown, and you can find whatever you desire of halal food at suitable prices.

## Sleep
32.62238444.0433161 The Baron Hotel, Alhusseiniya Road, ☏ +964 78 344 037 40. Within walking distance from the holy shrines. Includes several restaurants and a promenade along the river.    (updated Aug 2016)
32.62597844.0413822 Karbala Rayhaan by Rotana (كربلاء ريحان روتانا), ☏ +964 771 800 1800. Luxury hotel along just outside the city, along road from Baghdad.    (updated Feb 2017)

## Stay safe
See the warning on the Iraq article for information about the security situation.

## Go next
Najaf, another holy city in Iraq, with the Shrine of 'Ali.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
IMAM HUSSEIN SHRINE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: religious_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:35:50


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,026
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imam_Husayn_Shrine
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Imam al Husayn Shrine (Arabic: مَقَام الإِمَامُ الْحُسَيْن اِبِنْ عَلي, romanized: Maqām al-ʾImām al-Ḥusayn ʾibn ʿAlī) is the mausoleum of Husayn ibn Ali and Shi'ite mosque, located in the holy city of Karbala, in the Karbala Governorate of Iraq. Husayn was a grandson of Muhammad, and the site is near the place where he embraced martyrdom during the Battle of Karbala in 680 CE. The tomb of Husayn is one of the holiest sites in Shia Islam, outside of Mecca and Medina, and many make pilgrimages to the site. Every year, millions of pilgrims visit the city to observe Ashura, which marks the commemoration of Husayn's death for all Muslims.

Description
The boundary wall of the shrine surrounds wooden gates covered with glass decorations. The gates open into a courtyard separated into smaller rooms or precincts with many "iwans" along the walls. The grave of Husayn is enclosed within a metal-mesh like structure, found directly beneath the golden dome. On 5 March 2013, the process of replacing the zarih (metal mesh like structure) over the tomb of Husayn was completed and the new zarih inaugurated. The Al Abbas Mosque is located nearby. Plans to replace the shrine's historic dome with a modern steel framed one were met with controversy, especially by historic preservationists, as it would severely distort the shrine's historic integrity and character.
The first dome is 27 metres (89 ft) high and completely covered with gold. At the bottom, it is surrounded with twelve windows, each of which is about 1.25 metres (4 ft 1 in) away from the other, from the inside, and 1.30 metres (4 ft 3 in) from the outside. The shrine has an area of 59 metres (194 ft) by 75 metres (246 ft) with ten gates, and about 65 decorated rooms used for studying.

Burials
The grave of Husayn ibn Ali is found in the middle of the precinct, it is called the Rawḍah ("garden") and it has several doors. The most famous one is called Al-Qiblah or Bāb al-Zah'ab. On the right hand side of the entrance is the tomb of Habīb ibn Madhahir al-Asadī (حبیب ابن مظاهر الاسدی), a friend and companion of Husayn since their childhood and a casualty of the Battle of Karbala.
Within the shrine of Husayn can also be found a grave of all the 72 martyrs of Karbalā'. They were buried in a mass grave which was then covered with soil to the ground level. This mass grave is at the foot of Husayn's grave. Beside Husayn's grave, there are also the graves of his two sons: 'Alī al-Akbar and the six-month old, 'Alī al-Asghar. Along with the graves of the martyrs of Karbala, is also the grave of the very first custodian of Imam Husayn shrine, Ibrahim al-Mujab, grandson of seventh shi'ite Imam Musa al-Kazim.

History
Husayn bought a piece of land after his arrival at Karbala' from Bani Asad. He and his Ahl al-Bayt are buried in that portion, known as Arabic: الحائر, romanized: al-Ḥā'ir, where the shrines are presently located. The history of destruction and reconstruction of the shrines of Karbala' is long. Both the shrines were greatly extended by successive Muslim rulers, but suffered repeated destruction from attacking armies. Several rulers extended, decorated and kept the shrines and its precincts in good condition. Among them is Fath-Ali Shah Qajar, who in 1250 AH ordered the construction of two shrines, one over Husayn's grave and the other over the grave of his half-brother, Abbas ibn Ali. 
From the time of Husayn ibn Ali's death in 680, pilgrimages to commemorate the massacre have often been repressed. Despite many attempts by successive rulers, such as Al-Rashīd and Al-Mutawakkil, to put a restriction on the development of the area, it has nonetheless evolved into a city.
The historian Ibn Kuluwayh mentioned that those who buried Husayn ibn 'Alī constructed a special, durable identifying marker for the gravesite.
Larger, more significant construction on the gravesite began during the rule of al-Saffah (r. 750–754 CE), the first caliph of the long-lasting Abbasid caliphate (an Islamic dynasty). However, heavy restrictions were put in place to prevent people from visiting the grave during the rule of Hārūn al-Rashīd, the fifth Abbasid caliph (r. 786–809 CE).
During the rule of al-Mā'mūn, the seventh Abbasid caliph (r. 813–833 CE), gravesite construction resumed until the year 850 CE, when al-Mutawakkil ordered the destruction of the grave and the filling of the resulting pit with water. His son who succeeded him as caliph, al-Muntasir, allowed people to visit the gravesite, and since then, building the precinct to the grave increased and developed step by step.
On the other hand, the historian Ibn al-Athir, stated that in 371 AH (981/982CE), 'Adhud ad-Dawlah became the first to expansively lay the foundations for large-scale construction and to generously decorate the place. He also built houses and markets around the precinct, and surrounded Karbalā with a high boundary wall, turning it into a strong castle.
In 407 AH (1016/1017CE), the precinct caught fire due to the dropping of two large candles on the wooden decorations. The state minister at the time, Hasan ibn Fadl, rebuilt the damaged sections.

Timeline
The following events are in chronological order, stating instances that widely involved the shrine, impressing its construction, renovation and series of extremist activities that reduced its structure and killed pilgrims from time to time.

Gallery
See also
Shia Islam in Iraq
Holiest sites in Shia Islam
List of the oldest mosques in the world
List of mosques in Iraq

References
Bibliography
Aghaie, Kamran Scot (2004). The Martyrs of Karbala: Shi'i Symbols and Rituals in Modern Iran. University of Washington Press. ISBN 0-295-98448-1.
Litvak, Meir (1998). Shi'i Scholars of Nineteenth-Century Iraq: The Ulama of Najaf and Karbala. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-89296-1.
al Musawi, Muhsin (2006). Reading Iraq: Culture and Power and Conflict. I.B. Tauris. ISBN 1-84511-070-6.
Shimoni, Yaacov; Levine, Evyatar (1974). Political Dictionary of the Middle East in the 20th Century. Quadrangle/New York Times Book Co.

External links

"In pictures: Pilgrims in Karbala" (photos). BBC News.
"Shia Shrines of Karbala". Sacred Destinations.
"Imam Hussain Holy Shrine". Imam Hussain.org.
"Holy Shrine of Imam al-Husayn". WikiShia.net.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ERBIL CITADEL
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: fortress
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:35:58


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 3,413
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citadel_of_Erbil
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Citadel of Erbil (Kurdish: قەڵای هەولێر Qelay Hewlêr, Arabic: قلعة اربيل, romanized: Qal'at Erbīl), locally called Qellat,  is a tell or occupied mound, and the historical city centre of Erbil in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq. The citadel was added to the World Heritage List on 21 June 2014.
The earliest evidence for occupation of the citadel mound dates to the 5th millennium BC, and possibly earlier. It appears for the first time in historical sources in the Ebla tablets in modern Syria around 2000 BC, and gained particular importance during the Neo-Assyrian period. During the Sassanian period and the Abbasid Caliphate, Erbil was an important centre for Christianity. After the Mongols captured the citadel in 1258, the importance of Erbil declined. During the 20th century, the urban structure was significantly modified, as a result of which a number of houses and public buildings were destroyed.
The buildings on top of the tell stretch over a roughly oval area of 430 by 340 metres (1,410 ft × 1,120 ft) occupying 102,000 square metres (1,100,000 sq ft). The only religious structure that currently survives is the Mulla Afandi Mosque. The mound rises between 25 and 32 metres (82 and 105 ft) from the surrounding plain.

History
Prehistory
The site of the citadel may have been occupied as early as the Neolithic period, as pottery fragments possibly dating to that period have been found on the slopes of the mound. Clear evidence for occupation comes from the Chalcolithic period, with sherds resembling pottery of the Ubaid and Uruk periods in the Jazira and southeastern Turkey, respectively. Given this evidence for early occupation, the citadel has been called the oldest continuously occupied town in the world.

Earliest historical records
Erbil appears for the first time in literary sources around 2300 BC in the archives of Ebla. According to Giovanni Pettinato, it is mentioned in two tablets as Irbilum.
The city was first largely under Sumerian domination from c. 3000 BC, until the rise of the Akkadian Empire (2335–2154 BC) which united all of the Akkadian Semites and Sumerians of Mesopotamia under one rule. Later, Erridupizir, king of Gutium, captured the city in 2200 BC.
At the end of the 3rd millennium BC, Erbil is mentioned in historical records of the Ur III period as Urbilum. King Shulgi destroyed Urbilum in his 43rd regnal year, and during the reign of his successor Amar-Sin, Urbilum was incorporated into the Ur III state. In the 18th century BC, Erbil appears in a list of cities that were conquered by Shamshi-Adad of Upper Mesopotamia and Dadusha of Eshnunna during their campaign against the land of Qabra. Shamshi-Adad installed garrisons in all the cities of the land of Urbil. During the 2nd millennium BC, Erbil was incorporated into Assyria. Erbil served as a point of departure for military campaigns toward the east.

From the Neo-Assyrian period to the Sassanids
Erbil was an important city during the Neo-Assyrian period. The city took part in the great revolt against Shamshi-Adad V that broke out over the succession of Shalmaneser III. During the Neo-Assyrian period, the name of the city was written as Arbi-Ilu, meaning 'Four Gods'. Erbil was an important religious centre that was compared with cities such as Babylon and Assur. Its goddess Ishtar of Erbil was one of the principal deities of Assyria, often named together with Ishtar of Nineveh. Her sanctuary was repaired by the kings Shalmaneser I, Esarhaddon and Assurbanipal. Inscriptions from Assurbanipal record oracular dreams inspired by Ishtar of Erbil. Assurbanipal probably held court in Erbil during part of his reign and received there envoys from Rusa II of Urartu after the defeat of the Elamite ruler Teumman.
After the end of the Assyrian Empire, Erbil was first controlled by the Medes and then incorporated into the Achaemenid Empire before it became part of the empire of Alexander the Great after the Battle of Gaugamela, which was fought near Erbil in 331 BC. Subsequently, after the partition of Alexander the Great's Empire by his generals (known as Diadochoi), the city was called Arabella or Arbela and it was part of the Hellenistic Seleucid Empire. After the 1st century BCE, the Roman and Parthian Empire fought over control of Erbil, or Arbira as it was known in that period. After the 1st century AD, Arbela became an important Christian center. During the Sassanid period, Erbil was the seat of a satrap (governor). In 340 AD, Christians in Erbil were persecuted and in 358, the governor became a martyr after he converted to Christianity. A Nestorian school was founded in Erbil by the School of Nisibis in c. 521. During this period, Erbil was also the site of a Zoroastrian fire temple.

Muslim conquest until the Ottomans
Erbil was conquered by the Muslims in the 7th century. It remained an important Christian center until the 9th century, when the bishop of Erbil moved his seat to Mosul. In the middle of the 10th century, Erbil came under the rule of Hadhabani Kurds until 1063 when it was taken over by the Seljuk Turks. From the first half of the 12th century until 1233, Erbil was the seat of the Begteginids, a Turcoman dynasty that rose to prominence under the reign of Zengi, the atabeg of Mosul. In 1183, Zain ad-Din Yusuf, ruler of Erbil, shifted his allegiance to the Kurdish Ayyubid Sultanate. In 1190 when Zain ad-Din Yusuf died, his older brother Muzaffar al-Din Gökböri, who was previously governor of Edessa, became the new governor of Erbil. He created a lower town around the city on the citadel mound and founded hospitals and madrasahs. When Gökböri died in 1233 without an heir, control of Erbil shifted to the Abbasid Caliph al-Mustansir after he had besieged the city.

Mongols
When the Mongols invaded the Near East in the 13th century, they attacked Erbil for the first time in 1237. They plundered the lower town but had to retreat before an approaching caliphal army and had to put off the capture of the citadel. After the fall of Baghdad to Hülegü and the Mongols in 1258, they returned to Erbil and were able to capture the citadel after a siege lasting six months. Hülegü then appointed a Christian governor to the town and there was an influx of Jacobite Christians, who were allowed to build a church.
As time passed, persecutions of Christians, Jews and Buddhists throughout the Ilkhanate began in earnest in 1295 under Oïrat amir Nauruz. This manifested early on in the reign of the Ilkhan Ghazan. In 1297, after Ghazan had felt strong enough to overcome Nauruz' influence, he put a stop to the persecutions.
During the reign of the Ilkhan Öljeitü some of the Christian inhabitants retreated to the citadel to escape persecution. In the spring of 1310, the Malik (governor). Despite Mar Yahballaha's best efforts to avert the impending doom, the citadel was at last taken by Ilkhanate troops on 1 July 1310, and all the defenders were massacred, as were all the Kurdish inhabitants of the lower town.
After Battle of Chaldiran in 1514, Erbil came under control of Soran emirate, a semi-independent Kurdish emirate under the Ottoman Empire. In the 18th century Baban Emirate took the city but it was retaken by Soran ruler Mir Muhammad Pasha of Rawanduz in 1822. The Soran emirate continued ruling over Erbil until it was retaken by the Ottoman Turks in 1851. Erbil became part of the Mosul Vilayet in Ottoman Empire until World War I, when the Ottomans were defeated by the British Empire. The town had approximately 3,200 inhabitants, including a sizeable Jewish minority.

Modern period
During the 20th century, the citadel witnessed significant urban and social changes. A 15-metre (49 ft) high steel water tank was erected on the citadel in 1924, providing the inhabitants with purified water, but also causing water damage to the foundations of the buildings due to increased water seepage. The number of inhabitants gradually declined over the 20th century as the city at the foot of the citadel grew and wealthier inhabitants moved to larger, modern houses with gardens. In 1960, over 60 houses, a mosque, and a school were demolished to make way for a straight road connecting the southern gate with the northern gate. Some reconstruction works were carried out in 1979 on the citadel's southern gate and the hammam. In 2007, the remaining 840 families were evicted from the citadel as part of a large project to restore and preserve the historic character of the citadel. These families were offered financial compensation. One family was allowed to continue living on the citadel to ensure that there would be no break in the possible 8,000 years of continuous habitation of the site, and the government plans to have 50 families live in the citadel once its renovated. In 2004, the Kurdish Textile Museum opened its doors in a renovated mansion in the southeast quarter of the citadel.

The Citadel and the Bazaar
The city of Erbil is defined by the central circular mound that is the citadel, 102,000 square metres of land raised 26 metres above the surrounding city, presumed to have been started in antiquity as a tell. Around and beneath it to the south sprawl a maze of alleyways where the ancient commercial heart of the city beats strongly to this day. The citadel dwellings still stand, although they are now vacated as part of the UNESCO development project to renovate the buildings. The market area below is thought to have been created in the time of Sultan Muzafferddin Kokberi (1190–1233). This period, the only time in its long history when Erbil flourished as an independent city state, also saw the creation of the Mudhafaria Minaret in downtown Erbil, and was also the time when the Muzafferddin madrassahs (schools) were founded.
The area around the southern base of the citadel has received the attention of modern town planners, with the large open-air Lana market where once market stalls sold leather crafts now and replaced by a large modern shopping mall. The covered market, known as Qasariyah, still stands largely unchanged: A labyrinth of small alleyways protected from sun and rain by a latticework of corrugated iron. Beneath these eaves are the numerous shopkeepers selling wares largely imported from the Far East interspersed with craftsmen plying a trade they inherited from their forefathers in the late nineteenth century when the bazaar was restored: Jewellers, cobblers, carpenters, tinsmiths and butchers. Where possible, tradesmen gather alongside others who trade in the same wares, giving each alleyway a specialism such as the passageway towards the north-east corner where honey and dairy products are sold – yoghurts and cheeses piling the highly valued local honey. Another highly prized tradition is the creation of Klash shoes – an ancient uniquely Kurdish craft when white cloth is beaten on small anvils to create hardwearing footwear. These, and the traditional fabrics sold in the textile souk, are ever-popular in the run-up to the annual Newroz celebrations when the townspeople assume traditional attire.

Architecture and layout
The citadel is situated on a large tell – or settlement mound – of roughly oval shape that is between 25 and 32 metres (82 and 105 ft) high. The area on top of the mound measures 430 by 340 metres (1,410 ft × 1,120 ft) and is 102,000 square metres (1,100,000 sq ft) large. Natural soil has been found at a depth of 36 metres (118 ft) below the present surface of the mound. The angle of the citadel mound's slopes is c. 45°. Three ramps, located on the northern, eastern and southern slopes of the mound, lead up to gates in the outer ring of houses. The southern gate was the oldest and was rebuilt at least once, in 1860, and demolished in 1960. The current gate house was constructed in 1979. The eastern gate is called the Harem Gate and was used by women. It seems unclear when the northern gate was opened. One source claims that it was opened in 1924, while another observes that there were only two gates in 1944 – the southern and eastern gates.

During the early 20th century, there were three mosques, two schools, two takyas and a hammam on the citadel. The citadel also housed a synagogue until 1957. The only religious structure that currently survives is the Mulla Afandi Mosque, which was rebuilt on the location of an earlier 19th-century mosque. The hammam was built in 1775 by Qassim Agha Abdullah. It went out of service during the 1970s and was renovated in 1979, although many original architectural details were lost.
When it was still occupied, the citadel was divided in three districts or mahallas: from east to west the Serai, the Takya and the Topkhana. The Serai was occupied by notable families; the Takya district was named after the homes of dervishes, which are called takyas; and the Topkhana district housed craftsmen and farmers. A 1920 inventory showed that at that time the citadel was divided into 506 house plots. Since then the number of houses and inhabitants has gradually declined. For example, in 1984 4,466 people lived in 375 houses, whereas a 1995 census showed that the citadel had only 1,631 inhabitants living in 247 houses. Until the opening-up of the main north–south thoroughfare, the streets on the citadel mound radiated outward from the southern gate like the branches of a tree. Streets were between 1 and 2.5 metres (3 ft 3 in and 8 ft 2 in) wide and ranged in length from 300 metres (980 ft) for major alleyways to 30–50 metres (98–164 ft) for cul-de-sacs.

The perimeter wall of the citadel is not a continuous fortification wall, but consists of the façades of approximately 100 houses that have been built against each other. Because they have been built on or near the steep slope of the citadel mound, many of these façades were strengthened by buttresses to prevent their collapse or subsidence. There were circa 30 city-palaces; most of them located along the perimeter of the citadel. The oldest surviving house that can be securely dated through an inscription was built in 1893. The oldest houses can be found on the southeastern side of the mound, whereas houses on the northern perimeter date to the 1930s–1940s. Before the introduction of modern building techniques, most houses on the citadel were built around a courtyard. A raised arcade overlooking the courtyard, a flat roof and a bent-access entrance to prevent views of the courtyard and the interior of the house were characteristic elements of the houses on the citadel.

Research and restoration
In 2006 and 2007, a team from the University of West Bohemia, together with Salahaddin University in Arbil, carried out an extensive survey and evaluation of the entire citadel. As part of this project, geodetic measurements of the citadel were taken and these were combined with satellite imagery, regular photographic imagery and aerial photographs to create a map and digital 3D model of the citadel mound and the houses on top of it. Geophysical prospection was carried out in some areas of the citadel to detect traces of older architecture buried under the present houses. Archaeological investigations included an archaeological survey on the western slope of the citadel mound, and the excavation of a small test trench in the eastern part of the citadel.
in 2012, the Higher Committee for the Maintenance and Rehabilitation of the Erbil Citadel decided to conduct excavation searching for the remains of the wall and the historical fortifications of the citadel. The excavations took place in four seasons 2013-2014-2015. A part of the citadel wall of Erbil was discovered which was not previously visible. Not much was known about it until then, with only passing references in historical writings mentioning that the wall was surrounding the citadel, which enabled the inhabitants of the citadel to defend it against the attacks of enemies and invaders.
A Neo-Assyrian chamber tomb was found at the foot of the citadel mound during construction activities in 2008. It was subsequently excavated by the local Antiquities Service and archaeologists from the German Archaeological Institute (DAI). The tomb was plundered in antiquity but still contained pottery dating to the 8th and 7th centuries BC. The cooperation between the Antiquities Service and the DAI was continued later that year with a further investigation of the tomb and with a small excavation nearby and geophysical survey of the surrounding area, in which also students from Salahaddin University participated. These investigations revealed the presence of architecture probably dating to the Neo-Assyrian period, as well as more burials belonging to subsequent centuries.

In 2007, the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) established the High Commission for Erbil Citadel Revitalization (HCECR) to preserve and restore the citadel with the help of UNESCO. Among other things, the HCECR advocates the establishment of a zone extending up to 300–400 metres (980–1,310 ft) from the citadel in which building height should be restricted to approximately 10 metres (33 ft). This would ensure the visual dominance of the citadel over its surroundings.
On 2 April 2019, NASA described the historic citadel as possibly the oldest continuously occupied human settlement on Earth.

UNESCO World Heritage status
On 8 January 2010, the HCECR and the Iraqi State Board for Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH) submitted the Citadel of Erbil to the Iraqi Tentative List of sites that are considered for nomination as World Heritage Site. The submission states that "The Citadel is today one of the most dramatic and visually exciting cultural sites not only in the Middle East but also in the world." Two further agreements between the HCECR and UNESCO were signed in March 2010, and it was disclosed that Arbil Governorate will finance the restoration project with US$13 million. The first restoration works were carried out in June 2010. The Citadel was inscribed on the World Heritage List on 21 June 2014. In January 2017, UNESCO indicated that the site could be removed from the list due to the slow progress being made in the restoration program.

Places to visit at the Citadel
The Kurdish Textile and Cultural Museum
The French Institute of the Near East (French: Institut français du Proche-Orient, IFPO)
Erbil Citadel Cultural Center
Traditional Hammam (public bath)
Great Mosque (Mulla Effendi Mosque)
Erbil Stones and Gems Museum
Turkmen Heritage House
Exhibition of Miniature of Kurdistan Costumes
Kurdistan Music Archive
Barzani Museum
Erbil Citadel Interpretation Center
Exhibition of Handmade Carpets
Mulla Ibrahim Dogramachi Mosque

Gallery
See also
List of castles in Iraq

References
Sources
Cahen, Cl. (2010), "Begteginids", in Bearman, P.; Bianquis, Th.; Bosworth, C.E.; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W.P. (eds.), Encyclopaedia of Islam (second ed.), Brill Online, OCLC 624382576
Eidem, Jesper (1985), "News from the eastern front: the evidence from Tell Shemshāra", Iraq, 47: 83–107, doi:10.2307/4200234, ISSN 0021-0889, JSTOR 4200234
Kehrer, Nicole (2009), "Deutsche Experten untersuchen assyrische Grabstätte in Arbil", Deutsches Archäologisches Institut (in German), archived from the original on 7 June 2011, retrieved 8 July 2010
Kehrer, Nicole (2010), "Deutsche Archäologen arbeiten wieder im Irak", Deutsches Archäologisches Institut (in German), archived from the original on 7 June 2011, retrieved 8 July 2010
McDermid, Charles (29 July 2010), "A Facelift for an Ancient Kurdish Citadel", Time, archived from the original on 31 July 2010, retrieved 2 August 2010
Morony, Michael G. (1984), Iraq after the Muslim conquest, Princeton: Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-05395-0
Naval Intelligence Division (1944), Iraq and the Persian Gulf, Geographical Handbook Series, OCLC 1077604
Nováček, Karel; Chabr, Tomáš; Filipský, David; Janiček, Libor; Pavelka, Karel; Šída, Petr; Trefný, Martin; Vařeka, Pavel (2008), "Research of the Arbil Citadel, Iraqi Kurdistan, First Season", Památky Archeologické, 99: 259–302, ISSN 0031-0506, retrieved 13 July 2010
Sourdel, D. (2010), "Irbil", in Bearman, P.; Bianquis, Th.; Bosworth, C.E.; van Donzel, E.; Heinrichs, W.P. (eds.), Encyclopaedia of Islam (second ed.), Brill Online, OCLC 624382576
Villard, Pierre (2001), "Arbèles", in Joannès, Francis (ed.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Bouquins (in French), Paris: Robert Laffont, pp. 68–69, ISBN 978-2-221-09207-1
Woods, John E. (1977), "A note on the Mongol capture of Isfahān", Journal of Near Eastern Studies, 36 (1): 49–51, doi:10.1086/372531, ISSN 0022-2968, JSTOR 544126
Grousset, Rene, The Empire of the Steppes, (Translated from the French by Naomi Walford), New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press (1970)

Further reading
External links

Citadel of Arbil on the World Heritage List
High Commission for Erbil Citadel Revitalization (HCECR)
Research of the citadel at Arbil, Kurdistan Region
Pictures of houses in the vicinity of Erbil Citadel



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SHANIDAR CAVE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:36:06


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 3,224
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shanidar_Cave
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shanidar Cave (Kurdish: ئەشکەوتی شانەدەر, romanized: Eşkewtî Şaneder, Arabic: كَهَف شانِدَر) is an archaeological site on Bradost Mountain, within the Zagros Mountains in the Erbil Governorate of Kurdistan Region in northern Iraq. 
Neanderthal remains were discovered here  in 1953, including Shanidar 1, who survived several injuries, possibly due to care from others in his group, and Shanidar 4, the famed 'flower burial'. Until this discovery, Cro-Magnons, the earliest known H. sapiens in Europe, were the only individuals known for purposeful, ritualistic burials.

Archaeology
The Shanidar Cave site is located near Rowanduz, positioned about 0.5 miles (800 m) from the Great Zab river, and situated at an elevation of 2,100 feet (640 m) above sea level. The cave’s entrance is triangular, and the portal is 82 feet (25 m) wide by 26 feet (7.9 m) high. The cave’s dimensions are 130 feet (40 m) long, 175 feet (53 m) wide, and 45 feet (14 m) high.
Anthropologist Ralph Solecki, who was part of the University of Michigan Expedition to the Near East, first explored the site with a sounding in 1951. He returned in 1953, under the auspices of the Directorate General of Antiquities of Iraq and the Smithsonian Institution, for another sounding. The first human remains, believed to be those of a Neanderthal infant from the Mousterian era of the Middle Paleolithic period, were discovered in 1953.
The next season, during 1956–57, Solecki and his team conducted soundings at two nearby village sites and continued work at the Shanidar Cave. Three Neanderthal unfossilized skeletons were found at the cave. One was nearly complete (Shanidar I - field catalog no. 504 III), one was fragmentary (Shanidar III - field catalog no. 384 III), and for one only the skull was excavated at that time (Shanidar II - field catalog no. 618 III). Archaeologists also uncovered the Neolithic remains of an infant and a female adolescent, buried with grave goods. The pair is believed to represent a mother and her child, who may have died during childbirth or due to a postpartum infection.   Frequent use of explosives, up to eight sticks at a time, were employed in these excavations.
During the fourth season of 1960, a largely complete adult Neanderthal skeleton was recovered (Shanidar IV). Its state was considerably more fragile than the earlier specimens. While extracting it, the bones of another Neanderthal specimen, or possibly two, were noted and tentatively designated Shanidar VI. The former was presumed male and the latter female based on size. The badly damaged and scattered remains of one adult Neanderthal male was designated Shanidar V.

After the field material had been processed and analyzed, more Neanderthal remains were declared. Shanidar 9 was an infant represented only by vertebrae. The remains of Shanidar 9 were discovered during the removal of Shanidar 4 when encasing it in sediment block and transporting it to the Baghdad Museum. Shanidar 8 was an adult with a partial fragmentary skeleton. Shanidar 6 and 7 were skull, teeth and partial skeleton, all fragmentary. Shanidar 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7 were found as individual burials, while the other remains were found in a single compressed block.Overall these excavations found the remains of seven adult and two infants Neanderthals, dating from around 65,000–35,000 years ago. These individuals were uncovered amongst a Mousterian layer (layer D), overlaid by a Baradostian culture layer (layer C), a Mesolithic Zarzian layer (layer B) and a Holocene Neolithic layer (layer A), accompanied by various stone tools and animal remains. The cave also contains two later proto-Neolithic cemeteries, one of which dates back about 10,600 BCE and contains 35 individuals, and is considered by Solecki to belong to the Natufian culture. Also, in 2018, Shanidar-11 and Shanidar-12 were discovered.

Recent work
Investigations were conducted in 2014-2015 under the auspices of the Kurdistan Directorate of Antiquities. The remains found in the Shanidar cave are being reexamined to analyze the mortuary activity of the Neanderthal people who inhabited this area. There are various signs of activity with the remains after death being that the position of the skull and mandible of Shanidar 1 were not natural. Examinations of other sites will be integral in understanding and analyzing the activity of the remains after death of those found in the Shanidar cave. Additional work is being conducted on the faunal remains found in Layer D at the University of Chicago to analyze butchery activity. Many remains found had cut marks that were caused by flint items which correlates to butchery practices.

Neanderthal remains
The ten Neanderthals at the site were found within a Mousterian layer which also contained hundreds of stone tools including points, side-scrapers, and flakes and bones from animals including wild goats and spur-thighed tortoises.
The first nine (Shanidar 1–9) were unearthed between 1957 and 1961 by Ralph Solecki and a team from Columbia University. The skeleton of Shanidar 3 is held at the Smithsonian Institution. The others (Shanidar 1, 2, and 4–8) were kept in Iraq and may have been lost during the 2003 invasion, although casts remain at the Smithsonian. In 2006, while sorting a collection of faunal bones from the site at the Smithsonian, Melinda Zeder discovered leg and foot bones from a tenth Neanderthal, now known as Shanidar 10.

Shanidar 1
Shanidar 1 was an elderly Neanderthal male known as 'Nandy' to his excavators. He was aged between 30 and 45 years. Shanidar 1 had a cranial capacity of 1,600 cm3, was around the height of 5 feet 7 inches (170 cm), and displayed severe signs of deformity. He was one of four reasonably complete skeletons from the cave which displayed trauma-related abnormalities, which in his case would have been debilitating to the point of making day-to-day life painful.
During the course of the individual's life, he had suffered a violent blow to the left side of his face, creating a crushing fracture to his left orbit which would have left him partially or totally blind in one eye. Research by Ján Lietava shows that the individual exhibits "atypically worn teeth". Severe changes to the individual's incisors and a flattened capitulum show additional evidence towards Shanidar 1 suffering from a degenerative disease. Additionally, analysis shows that Shanidar 1 likely suffered from profound hearing loss, as his left ear canal was partially blocked and his right ear canal was completely blocked by exostoses. He also suffered from a withered right arm which had been fractured in several places. A fracture of the individual's C5 vertebrae is thought to have caused damage to his muscle function (specifically the deltoids and biceps) of the right arm. Shanidar 1 healed, but this caused the loss of his lower arm and hand. This is thought to be either congenital, a result of childhood disease and trauma, or due to an amputation later in his life. The sharp point caused by a distal fracture of the individual's right humerus points towards this theory of amputation.  If the arm was amputated, this demonstrates one of the earliest signs of surgery on a living individual. The arm had healed, but the injury may have caused some paralysis down his right side, leading to deformities in his lower legs and feet. Studies show that this individual had suffered from two broken legs. This would have resulted in him walking with a pronounced, painful limp. These findings in Shanidar 1's skeleton propose that he was unlikely to be able to provide for himself in a Neanderthal society.
More recent analysis of Shanidar 1 by Washington University Professor Erik Trinkaus and Dr. Sébastien Villotte of the French National Centre for Scientific Research confirm that bony growths in his ear canals would have resulted in extensive hearing loss. These bony growths support a diagnosis of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH), also known as Forestier's disease. This diagnosis would make Shanidar 1 the oldest hominin specimen clearly presenting this systemic condition. The researchers found these bone growths in multiple places all over the partial skeleton.
Based on the healing of his injuries, Shanidar 1 lived with them for a substantial time before his death. Assuming that Neanderthals did perform surgery on Shanidar 1, his recovery demonstrates that their methods were successful in sustaining life. The prolonged survival of an individual with significant disabilities has also provided the basis for conjecture about Neanderthal social behavior. According to paleoanthropologist Erik Trinkaus, Shanidar 1 must have been aided by others in order to survive his injuries. Due to the chronic effects of trauma, it was unlikely that this individual could independently provide for his family, so his post-injury lifespan may imply that he was kept alive due to his high social status or valuable cultural knowledge.
This evidence has also led to speculation about Neanderthals' capacity for altruistic behavior and the presence of ethos in the Neanderthal communities. The discovery of stone tools found in proximity to these individuals demonstrates that Neanderthals exhibited the intelligence to make everyday life easier for themselves, and their cognitive ability may have surpassed basic comprehension to include characteristics such as humility and compassion commonly associated with Homo sapiens. These individuals may have exhibited empathy or attached abstract meaning to life that caused them to want to help Shanidar 1.

Shanidar 2
Shanidar 2 was a Neanderthal male around the age of 30 who suffered from slight arthritis, found lying on his right side. It is estimated that Shanidar 2 was 5 feet 2 inches (157 cm) in stature, which places him just below the average height of a male Neanderthal. He was killed by rocks falling from the cave's ceiling, which crushed his skull and bones significantly. The skull had been compressed by about 5–6 cm (2.0–2.4 in). Much of his bones were missing when discovered, and the left tibia had teeth marks. Scavengers likely disposed of parts of his remains. There is evidence that Shanidar 2 was given a ritual send-off: a small pile of stones with some worked stone points (made out of chert) were found on top of his grave. Also, there had been a large fire by the burial site.
Shanidar 2 had a "higher cranial vault", and other skull proportions that did not quite match up to the average Neanderthal skull. This may prove that the Neanderthals of Shanidar had more of a "morphology of anatomically modern humans" than other Neanderthals, or that the group was very diverse. This points to similarities between the two species, Neanderthals and Homo sapiens, but it does not show any inherited "relationships within that species".

Shanidar 3
Shanidar 3 was a 40- to 50-year-old male, found in the same grave as Shanidar 1 and 2. A wound to the left 9th rib suggests that the individual died of complications from a stab wound by a sharp implement. Bone growth around the wound indicates that Shanidar 3 lived for at least several weeks after the injury with the object still embedded. The angle of the wound rules out self-infliction, but is consistent with an accidental or purposeful stabbing by another individual. Recent research has suggested that the injury may have been caused by a long range projectile. This would be the earliest example of inter-personal or inter-specific violence in the human fossil record and the only such example amongst Neanderthals. The presence of early-modern humans, possibly armed with projectile weapons, in western Asia around the same time has been taken to imply that this injury may have resulted from inter-species conflict. However, spears produced by Neanderthals 300,000-400,000 years BP were likely used as projectiles. Shanidar 3 also suffered from a degenerative joint disorder in his foot resulting from a fracture or sprain, which would have resulted in painful, limited movement. The skeleton is on display at the Hall of Human Origins at the National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C.

Shanidar 4, the "flower burial"
The skeleton of Shanidar 4, an adult male aged 30–45 years, was discovered by Solecki in 1960, positioned on his left side in a partial fetal position.
For many years, Shanidar 4 was thought to provide strong evidence for a Neanderthal burial ritual. Routine soil samples from around the body, gathered for pollen analysis in an attempt to reconstruct the palaeoclimate and vegetational history of the site, were analysed eight years after its discovery. In two of the soil samples in particular, whole clumps of pollen were discovered by Arlette Leroi-Gourhan in addition to the usual pollen found throughout the site, suggesting that entire flowering plants (or at least heads of plants) had been part of the grave deposit. Furthermore, a study of the particular flower types suggested that the flowers may have been chosen for their specific medicinal properties. Yarrow, cornflower, bachelor's button, St Barnaby's thistle, ragwort, grape hyacinth, horsetail and hollyhock were represented in the pollen samples, all of which have been traditionally used, as diuretics, stimulants, and astringents and anti-inflammatories. This led to the idea that the man could have had shamanic powers, perhaps acting as medicine man to the Shanidar Neanderthals.
However, recent work has suggested that the pollen was perhaps introduced to the burial by animal action, as several burrows of a gerbil-like rodent known as the Persian jird were found nearby. The jird is known to store large numbers of seeds and flowers at certain points in their burrows and this argument was used in conjunction with the lack of ritual treatment of the rest of the skeletons in the cave to suggest that the Shanidar 4 burial had natural, not cultural, origins. Paul B. Pettitt has stated that the "deliberate placement of flowers has now been convincingly eliminated", noting that "A recent examination of the microfauna from the strata into which the grave was cut suggests that the pollen was deposited by the burrowing rodent Meriones persicus, which is common in the Shanidar microfauna and whose burrowing activity can be observed today". Despite his conclusions that flowers were unlikely to have been deliberately placed, Petitt nevertheless concludes that the Shanidar burials, because they happened over so many years, represent a deliberate mortuary practice by Neanderthals. It has also been suggested that some of the pollen was deposited by nesting solitary bees.

Shanidar 5
The Shanidar 5 remains were found during the 1960 excavations, in layer D, about 4.5 meters below datum. He was an adult Neanderthal, thought to be male and around 40–50 years of age before death. He was caught in the same rockfall that killed Shanidar 2. Recovered were a cranium, 4 teeth, 1 vertebrae, 8 ribs, and miscellaneous other bones. The arrangement of the broken skeletal remains was thought to have been due to animals intervening after death.  Radiocarbon results put the date at about 46,000 before the present day. Some years later a small correction to the original cranial reconstruction was found. During the recent excavations more pieces of Shanidar 5 were found
The cranium of Shanidar 5 was reconstructed by Erik Trinkaus and his colleagues beginning 1976 and was finalized in 1994 after correcting a couple of errors caught in the process. During the process of reconstruction, there were discussions suggesting signs of intentional cranial deformation. Erik Trinkaus suggested that Shanidar 5 had its cranium deformed intentionally as an infant. However, this implication was overruled due to the fact that the curve was missing after the correction of a misplaced cranium bone fragment. Still, the frontal mid sagittal angle of this individual was very flat at 147º. The cranium shows signs of endocranial hyperostosis where plaques are found in the left and right side of the frontal crest and in the front area of sagittal sinus.

Shanidar Z
In February 2020, researchers announced the discovery of more Neanderthal remains, which dated back to more than 70,000 years ago. Analysis of the site found that Shanidar Z was laid to rest in a gully that had been formed by hand for the placement of the body. The remains of Shanidar Z were identified as a female in her mid-40s or possibly older, and she stood at about five feet tall. A facial reconstruction was also completed from skull fragments.

Diets discovered
Land snails were excavated and discovered in significant amounts and thought to be part of the Shanidar diet. It is unclear whether this diet was caused from cultural change or a change in the environment that lead to changes in previous foods as seen in the analysis of size decrease in goats. However, there are other lineages from Africa that share this diet and was culturally motivated which may indicate that the Neanderthals in the Shanidar cave may have possibly changed their diet for cultural reasons. In Layer B, dating back to approximately 12,000 years ago, Ralph S. Solecki found numerous snail shells which may indicate the Shanidar maintained this diet for some time.

See also
List of fossil sites
List of human evolution fossils
List of Neanderthal fossils
Neanderthals in Southwest Asia
Paleopathology

External links
Shanidar Cave video
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shanidar_Cave.webm

Notes
Further reading
Agelarakis A., "Proto Neolithic Human Skeletal Remains in the Zawi-Chemi Layer in Shanidar Cave",  Sumer XL:1-2, pp. 7–16, (1987–88)
Agelarakis, Anagnostis (1989). The paleopathological evidence, indicators of stress of the Shanidar Proto-Neolithic and the Ganj Dareh early Neolithic human skeletal collections (Thesis).
Agelarakis, A (1993). "The Shanidar Cave Proto-Neolithic Human Population: Aspects of Demography and Paleopathology". Human Evolution. 8 (4): 235–253. doi:10.1007/bf02438114. S2CID 85239949.
Agelarakis, A.; Serpanos, Y. (2002). "Inner Ear Palaeopathological Manifestations, Causative Agents, and Implications Αffecting the Proto-Neolithic Homo sapiens Population of Shanidar Cave, Iraq". Human Evolution. 17.
Akazawa, T., "Preliminary notes on the Middle Palaeolithic assemblage from the Shanidar Cave.",  Sumer, vol. 31, no. 1–2, pp. 3–10, 1975
[4]Kabukcu, Ceren, et al., "Cooking in caves: Palaeolithic carbonised plant food remains from Franchthi and Shanidar", Antiquity 97.391, pp. 12-28, 2023
Pomeroy, Emma; Bennett, Paul; Hunt, Chris O.; Reynolds, Tim; Farr, Lucy; Frouin, Marine; Holman, James; Lane, Ross; French, Charles; Barker, Graeme (February 2020). "New Neanderthal remains associated with the 'flower burial' at Shanidar Cave". Antiquity. 94 (373): 11–26. doi:10.15184/aqy.2019.207. S2CID 212762342.
(PDF) Shanidar Cave - An Interesting Archaeological Site in the Kurdistan Region, IraqSissakian, Varoujan K.. "Shanidar Cave - An Interesting Archaeological Site in the Kurdistan Region, Iraq." UKH Journal of Science and Engineering, 3(2), pp. 1-9 (2019)
Solecki, Ralph S. (1954). "Shanidar cave: a paleolithic site in northern Iraq". Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution. Smithsonian Institution. pp. 389–425. OCLC 31836281.
Solecki, Ralph S.; Anagnostis P. Agelarakis (2004). The Proto-Neolithic Cemetery in Shanidar Cave. Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-1-58544-272-0.
Solecki, R. S., "Prehistory in Shanidar Valley, northern Iraq.", Science, vol.  139, pp. 179–93, 1963 Prehistory in Shanidar Valley, Northern Iraq.
Solecki, R. S., "Shanidar, the first flower people.",  New York: Knopf, 1971 ISBN 978-0394445113
Stewart, T. D. (1977). "The Neanderthal Skeletal Remains from Shanidar Cave, Iraq: A Summary of Findings to Date". Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. 121 (2): 121–165. JSTOR 986524.
Erik Trinkaus, The Shanidar Neanderthals, Academic Press, 1983, ISBN 0-12-700550-1
Trinkaus, Erik; Zimmerman, M. R. (January 1982). "Trauma among the Shanidar Neandertals". American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 57 (1): 61–76. doi:10.1002/ajpa.1330570108. PMID 6753598.
Weule, Genevieve (18 February 2020). "Skeletons and a whole lot of flowers: Was this a Neanderthal cemetery?". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation.

External links
Smithsonian Shanidar 3 pages
Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "The Neanderthals That Taught Us About Humanity". PBS Eons. January 16, 2020 – via YouTube.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 1,105
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%83%D9%87%D9%81_%D8%B4%D8%A7%D9%86%D8%AF%D8%B1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

كهف شاندر هو كهف قديم من عصور ما قبل التاريخ في محافظة أربيل بإقليم كردستان العراق بشمال العراق. وجد في الكهف بقايا عشرٍ من النياندرتال يرجع تاريخهم إلى 65-35 ألف عام. يحتوي الكهف أيضًا على مقبرتين تعودان إلى العصر الحجري الحديث الخزفي السابق، يرجع تاريخ إحداها إلى 10,600 سنة ويحتوي على 35 فردًا.
يُعتبر شاندر 1 الأكثر شهرة من النياندرتال المكتشف، الذي نجى من العديد من الإصابات خلال حياته، وربما يرجع ذلك إلى دفاع أعضاء قبيلته عنه، وشاندر 4، الذي يرقد جسده بجانب زهرة والتي يمكن تفسيرها كدليل على ممارسة النياندرتال لطقوس الدفن أو ربما تكون مجرد تلوث حيواني.

بقايا النياندرتال
وجدت الهياكل العشر من نياندرتال في الموقع خلال طبقة موستيرية كانت تحتوي على مئات الأدوات الحجرية منها رماح ومكشطة جانبية وعظام حيوانات كالماعز البري والسلحفاة مهمازية الورك.
أول تسعة من النياندرتال المكتشف (شاندر 1-9) كشف عنهم رالف سوليكي وفريق من جامعة كولومبيا بين 1957 و1961. حُمل هيكل شاندر 3 في مؤسسة سميثسونيان. وحُفظ الآخرون (شاندر 1 و2 و4-8) في العراق وربما فقدوا خلال غزو العراق عام 2003، إلا أن بعض القوالب لاتزال موجودة في سميثسونيان. في عام 2006، اكتشفت مليندا زيدير ساقًا بينما كانت تبوِّب تشكيلة العظام الحيوانية من الموقع في سميثسونيان، كانت تلك الساق وعظام القدم تعود إلى النياندرتال العاشر والمعروف حاليًا بـ«شاندر 10».

شاندر 1
شاندر 1 هو نياندرتال ذكر بدائي معروف باسم «ناندي» كما أطلق عليه مستكشفوه. كان عمره يتراوح بين 40 إلى 50 عامًا، وهو مُسن بالنسبة إلى النياندرتال، بما يعادل 80 عامًا اليوم، وأظهر العديد من علامات التشوه. كان واحدًا من أربع هياكل كاملة من الكهف أظهرت عاهات سببتها الإصابات الجسدية. وفي حالته كانت تلك الإصابات معيقة للحياة لدرجة أنها جعلت حياته اليومية مؤلمة.
عانى شاندر 1 في فترة ما في حياته من الضرب العنيف على الجانب الأيسر من الوجه، مما تسبب في إصابة كسرية في محجر العين الأيسر وأدى إلى عمى كامل أو جزئي لعينه اليسرى. أظهر التحليل أن شاندر 1 عانى من صمم عميق، لأن مجرى الأذن اليسرى كان مسدودًا جزئيًّا وأذنه اليمنى كانت مسدودة بالعرن. كما أنه كان يعاني من أضرارًا في ذراعه اليمنى حيث انكسرت مرات عديدة وعاودت الالتئام، ولكن ذلك تسبب في النهاية في فصل أسفل الذراع واليد. يُعتقد أن ذلك بسبب خلل وراثيّ أو من مرض في الطفولة أو بسبب البتر في فترة متأخرة في الحياة. التئم الجرح ولكن الإصابة ربما تسببت في شلل على الجانب الأيمن، مما أدى إلى تشوهات في ساقيه وقدميه أدت إلى أن يمشي بعرج مؤلم.
اكتُسبت كل تلك الإصابات قبل الوفاة بفترة طويلة، نظرًا لما يظهر من التئام واسع، ويُستخدم ذلك للاستدلال على أن النياندرتال اعتنوا بالمرضى والمسنين، مما يظهر انتشار التعاون الاجتماعي بينهم.

شاندر 2
كان شاندر 2 لذكر بالغ، مات في حادثة وقوع الصخور في الكهف، مما تسبب في كسر جمجمته وعظامه. يوجد دليل على أن شاندر 2 قد تلقى جنازة وداع بعد وفاته، حيث وجدت حزمة من الأحجار بها بعض الأحجار المصنوعة المدببة فوق قبره. كما كان هناك إشعالًا للنار في مكان الدفن.

شاندر 3
كان شاندر 3 ذكر نياندرتال عمره بين 40 و50 عامًا، وجد في نفس مقبرة شاندر 1 وشاندر 2. تقترح الإصابة الموجودة على ضلعه الأيسر التاسع أنه مات نتيجة طعنة بأداة حادة في الصدر. يشير نمو العظام حول الجرح أن شاندر عاش بعد الطعنة على الأقل لمدة 3 أسابيع مع وجود الأداة الحادة في صدره. تستبعد تلك الطعنة محاولة إيذاء النفس، وتقترح أنه تعرض لحادثة أو إلى طعن عمدي على يد فرد آخر. تقترح الأبحاث الأخيرة أن هذه الإصابة حدثت بسبب الطعن برمح واسع المدى. ربما يُعتبر ذلك من الأمثلة الأولى على العراك الثنائي في الحفريات البشرية وهو المثال الوحيد بين النياندرتال. إن وجود الإنسان الحديث الأول، والذي كان مسلحًا بالأسلحة القاذفة، في غرب آسيا في نفس الحقبة الزمنية، يقترح قيام الصراع بينهما. عانى شاندر 3 من الداء المفصلي التنكسي في قدمه نتيجة كسر أو تمزق، مما أدى إلى تحديد حركته وألم في المفصل. يُعرض الهيكل في صالة الأصول الإنسانية في المتحف الوطني للتاريخ الطبيعي في واشنطن.

شاندر 4 (المقبرة المزهرة)
اكتُشف هيكل شاندر 4، لذكر بالغ عمره بين 30 و45 عامًا، في سوليكي عام 1960، موضوعًا على جانبه الأيسر في وضع جنيني جزئي.
أعتُقد للعديد من السنوات أن شاندر 4 يوفر دليلًا على انتشار طقوس الدفن بين النياندرتال. جُمعت عينات التربة المحيطة بالجثمان وحُللت حبوب اللقاح في محاولة لإعادة بناء المناخ القديم والتاريخ الخضري للموقع، وحُللت جميعها بعد 8 سنوات من الاكتشاف. في عينتين من التربة بالتحديد، اكتشف أرليت لوري غورهان كُتلًا من حبوب اللقاح علاوة على حبوب اللقاح المكتشفة في الموقع، مما يقترح وجود النباتات المزهرة (أو على الأقل الرؤوس) وأنها كانت جزءً من بقايا القبر. كما تقترح دراسة أجريت على أنواع الزهور أنها كانت مختارة لأجل خصائص دوائية محددة. وجد في عينات فحص حبوب اللقاح أدلة على وجود النباتات التالية: قيصوم ألفي الأوراق وقنطريون صيفي ونوع من زهرة الشيخ والخطمية، وجميعها معروف بالقدرات العلاجية حيث تُستخدم كمدرات للبول ومحفزات ومادة قابضة علاوة على خواصها المضادة للالتهاب. يدعم ذلك اقتراحًا؛ أن هذا الفرد كان يقوم بدور الطبيب في جماعته وأنه اتسم بالقدرات الشامانية.
تقترح الأعمال الحديثة أن حبوب اللقاح دخلت التربة بفعل تأثير الحيوانات، حيث وجدت نماذج لقوارض تشبه حيوان الجربوع يُعرف بالجرذ الفارسي. كان الجرذ معروفًا بتخزين كمية كبيرة من البذور والأزهار في الجحور، استُخدمت تلك الحجة بالإضافة إلى حجة الافتقار إلى العلاج الطقوسي لبقية الهياكل العظمية في الكهف لاقتراح أن شاندر 4 دُفن بطريقة طبيعية وليست طقوسية الأصل. صرَّح بول ب. بيتيت أن «الوضع العمدي للزهور على القبر دُحض الآن تمامًا» مشددًا على أن «الفحص الحديث للبقايا الحيوانية من الطبقات التي انتزع منها القبر تقترح أن حبوب اللقاح كانت موضوعة بفعل الجرذ الفارسي، وهو أمر شائع في البقايا الحيوانية مع شاندر، ويمكننا ملاحظة نشاط الجحور اليوم». بالرغم من استنتاجاته عن عدم الوضع العمدي للأزهار، يستنتج بيتيت أن دفن شاندر، لأنه حدث منذ زمن بعيد للغاية، يمثل ممارسات جنائزية لنياندرتال.

موقعه
يوجد هذا الكهف على جانب جبل برادوست ضمن جبال زاكروس ضمن إقليم كردستان بشمال العراق وقد تمّ التنقيب عن الكهف بين عامي 1957-1961 من قبل رالف سوليكي وفريقه من جامعة كولومبيا وأثمر عملهم عن الهياكل العظمية النياندرتالية البالغة الأولى في العراق العائدة إلى 80,000 سنة قبل الميلاد.
نتج التنقيب في هذه المنطقة عن تسع هياكل عظمية نياندرتالية لأعمار مختلفة وفي حالات مختلفة من الحفظ والكمال وحُفظت وصنفت حسب الأرقام
من شاندر1 - شاندر 9.
الفرد العاشر أُكتُشِفَ مؤخراً وقد كان هذا النياندرتال العاشر مدفوناً وفق مراسم جنائزية.
هيكل عظمي واحد مع قوالب لبقية الهياكل هي كل ما تبقى في المعهد من النتائج حيث أن الهياكل العظمية الأخرى تشتت وتفرقت في العراق.

محتوياته
في كهف شاندر عُثر على دفنة مهمة وملفتة للنظر، اشتملت على عظام حيوانية وجماجم لحوالي 15 من الماعز، وعظام وريش نسور وصقور بلغت حوالي 17 طائراً. فُصلت العظام ورتبت بوضعية مقصودة، مما ولا شك يدعو للتساؤل عن سبب الاهتمام بدفن النسور والصقور مع جماجم الماعز.

انظر أيضاً
المواقع الأثرية في العراق (كتاب).

وصلات خارجية
فديو كهف شاندر
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Shanidar_Cave.webm

المصادر
وصلات خارجية
صفحات شاندر السمشسونية بالإنجليزية



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ZIGGURAT OF DUR-KURIGALZU
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:36:15


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,695
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dur-Kurigalzu
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dur-Kurigalzu (modern `Aqar-Qūf عَقَرْقُوف in Baghdad Governorate, Iraq) was a city in southern Mesopotamia, near the confluence of the Tigris and Diyala rivers, about 30 kilometres (19 mi) west of the center of Baghdad. It was founded by a Kassite king of Babylon, Kurigalzu I (died c. 1375 BC) and was abandoned after the fall of the Kassite dynasty (c. 1155 BC). The city was of such importance that it appeared on toponym lists in the funerary temple of the Egyptian pharaoh, Amenophis III (c. 1351 BC) at Kom el-Hettan".  The prefix Dur is an Akkadian term meaning "fortress of", while the Kassite royal name Kurigalzu is believed to have meant "shepherd of the Kassites". The tradition of naming new towns Dur dates back to the Old Babylonian period with an example being  Dūr-Ammī-ditāna. The city contained a ziggurat and temples dedicated to Mesopotamian gods, as well as a royal palace which covered 420,000 square meters.
The ziggurat at Aqar Quf, standing to a height of about 52 metres (171 ft), has been a very visible ancient monument for centuries. For camel caravans and modern road traffic, the ziggurat has served as a signal of the near approach to Baghdad. Because of Aqar Quf's easy accessibility and close proximity to the city of Baghdad, it has been one of Iraq's most visited and best-known sites. The ziggurat was often confused with the Tower of Babel by Western visitors to the area from the 17th century onwards.

History
The town of Dur Kurigalzu was founded by the Kassite King Kurigalzu I in the early 14th century BC and is situated along an east–west-trending limestone ridge between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers. Until the last century, the adjacent Aqar Quf depression would have been inundated with flood water part of the year. This site had access to fresh water from the Euphrates by means of the Isa Canal, known as the Patti-Enlil Canal in ancient times. The city functioned as the capital of Babylonia during the reign of Kurigalzu, and either as the capital or at least an important city during the period after. It was occupied continuously until the fall of the Kassite Dynasty in the 12th century BC when it was largely abandoned. The temple area, at least, was known to be active in the 7th century BC and in the Neo-Babylonian period. Up until recently (mostly between the 9th and 14th centuries AD), there have been smaller occupations at parts of Aqar Quf, with areas of the site being used for burials and for Arab settlement. It has been suggested that in earlier times the site was named Esâ.

Ziggurat
The Ziggurat of Dur-Kurigalzu, built in the early 14th century BC by Kurigalzu I, is located in the city's western area and is devoted to the chief Babylonian God Enlil, who Sumerians believed to govern over wind, air, earth, and storm.
The ziggurat's base measures 69m x 67m and it was constructed of large, well-tempered liben with many stamped baked bricks incorporated into the structure, bearing the name of Kurigalzu and his dedication of the temple E-U-GAL to Enlil. Facing the front, the Ziggurat can be approached from three main staircases leading up to the first level. Standing upright on the level withholds a terraced compound, built by layers of receding levels. At its core, there are consistent sun-dried square bricks with reed mats placed in every seven layers of brick to help hold the structure altogether. An axial flight of steps was discovered running outwards from the center of the side of the ziggurat towards the temple-complex and was built of solid kiln-baked brick set in bitumen.

Archaeology
In Kassite times the area was defined by a wall that enclosed about 425 hectares (1,050 acres). The wall, originally built by Kurigalzu I, was later rebuilt by Kurigalzu II (c. 1332—1308 BC). The site has several defined areas, Mound A (100 meters south of the ziggurat), Tell Ahmar, Tell Abu Shijar, Tell al-Abyadh, and a private housing area. The main elements, ziggurat, palaces, etc. are all within the city wall. The currently known structures of the site consist of nine temples (T1 to T9), with T1 being the ziggurat and associated temple to Enlil, three palaces (P1 to T3), and five housing areas (H1 to H5)
The site was visited by Bengt Bengtsson Oxenstierna in 1616. Agar Quf first appeared on a modern map by Edward Ives in 1773. The site was then described by Claudius James Rich in 1811. Aqar Quf (referred to then as Akerkuf, Agger Koof, or Akar-kuf) was visited and examined in 1837 by Francis Rawdon Chesney. The name of Dur-Kurigalzu was identified by Henry Rawlinson in the mid-19th century.

Excavations were conducted from 1942 through 1945, by Taha Baqir and Seton Lloyd in a joint excavation by the Iraqi Directorate-General of Antiquities and the British School of Archaeology in Iraq. Over 100 cuneiform tablets of the Kassite period were recovered, now in the Iraq Museum. Some were date-able to the reigns of Burna-Buriash II and Kashtiliash IV. They also showed that two of the palaces were named the Palace of the Mountain Sheep and the Palace of the Stag. A kudurru (IM 49991) dated to year five of Kassite ruler Nazi-Maruttash was also found. During the excavation, 5 fragments of a larger-than-life-size statue were discovered. They contain the longest yet found Kassite Sumerian inscriptions.
A baked brick pavement (T5) around two kilometers northwest of Tell al-Abyadh was found to be covered with hundreds of broken terracotta figurines dedicated to the god Gula. Bricks found in situ were dated to the reign of Kassite ruler Nazi-Maruttash. The excavations included the ziggurat, three temples, and part of the palace of Dur-Kurigalzu II.

In the early 1960s and from 1968 to 1975 the Iraqi Directorate-General of Antiquities continued to do some excavation around the ziggurat as part of a restoration project under Saddam Hussein The three excavated areas are the mound of Aqar Quf (including the ziggurat and large temple), a public building (approximately 100 metres (330 ft) to the west), and Tell al-Abyadh where a large palace was partially uncovered (about 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) to the south-west). Several burned cuneiform tables dated to the reign of Marduk-apla-iddina I were found there. As part of a temple restoration a pottery jar was found containing 220 Islamic silver dirhem coins from the Ilkhanid period.
Excavations continued between 1977 and 1980, led by Suphi Anwar Rashid and Amire al-Khayyat, in the temple area. Paving and wall bricks dedicated to Enlil and Ninlil were found as well as a Kassite double jar burial, an inscribed eyestone for Enlil dedicated by Kurigalzu, and two female figurines in ivory.
Another area within Dur-Kurigalzu, Tell Abu Shijar, was excavated by Iraqi archaeologists in 1992, 1993, and 2001 finding mainly late Kassite and lesser Parthian/Sassanian remains. Painted plaster wall fragments, similar to those found at Tell al-Abyadh, were recovered as well as a worn cylinder seal and thirteen cuneiform clay tablets. The tablets were unread (and may be lost) but 3 were noted to have dates of the Kassite king Nazi-Maruttash (1307—1282 BC). The site lies 1 kilometer west of the ziggurat and 500 meters southwest of Tell al-Abyadh being about 6 meters in height with only the central 120-meter by 150-meter mound undisturbed by modern activity.
In the late-1960s an Italian team conducted a photogrammatic survey of the ziggurat.

Wall paintings at Tell al-Abyadh
Some of the most significant finds of Kassite period artwork are found in the main palatial complex (P1) and its surrounding complexes (located at Tell al-Abyadh) of Dur-Kurigalzu about 1000 meters northwest of the main ziggurat. The recurring motifs of the artwork found on all four levels of the palatial complex are representational and contain human processional scenes and clusters of fruit; there are also geometric designs that contain parallel bands, chevrons, and rosettes. The processional scenes date to the time of the last Kassite king Marduk-apla-iddina I. The representational motif of human figures is also some of the only surviving instances of human representation in artwork from the Kassite period and gives an indication of the artistic technique utilized at the time. The majority of large, upright wall paintings can be found in the internal rooms of the palace that would have functioned as reception or public rooms. The highest concentration of this wall painting type can be found in Unit H sector on Level II named also 'PaintedPalace', dating to the reign of Kaštiliaš IV.
Another wall painting type is also found along recesses of the courtyards and between rooms and contains the same motifs of floral and geometric designs and processional scenes that Yoko Tomabechi states function to 'brighten the doorways and the inner rooms'. The colours utilised in these paintings are 'red, cobalt-blue, dark-blue, yellow, white and black'. Much of the palatial complex and its artwork inside remain unexcavated and need further exploration. In January 2025 the site of Aqar Quf has been included in the Tentative List of UNESCO World Heritage Convention.

Temples
At the base of the ziggurat steps, is a pavement that leads to one of the four excavated temples, E-U-GAL. This would also continue to lead into a court and several smaller rooms adjoining it. The other three temples are E-GASAN-AN-TA-GAL, E-SAG-DINGIR-RI-E-NE, and E-SAG-DINGIR-E-NE. King Kurigalzu appears to have built all these temples under great patronage. The entire complex mostly has liben walls that are thickly covered with plaster and may bear traces of fire, which are thought to reflect attempts in destroying the site in the past.

E-U-GAL
E-U-GAL, which is likely to mean "The House of the Great Lord," is believed to be the most important temple of Dur Kurigalzu. This name could also refer to the entire temple complex or the entire site as the text was engraved into bricks in all three temples and in the ziggurat.

E-GASAN-AN-TA-GAL
The name of the temple is a combination of "The House of the Lady" and words meaning "high", "firm", or "great". Inside this temple is a small staircase that leads up to an altar, subsidiary courts, and a room that appears to be the kitchen where a raised rectangular compartment was excavated and assumed to be an oven.

Tower
Between E-GASAN-AN-TA-GAL and E-U-GAL is a massive ruin, excavated to be 17 meters tall, that could be the foundation of a tower that was weathered away by floods. This structure was also made with liben and faced with baked bricks.

Current status
For 16 seasons in the 1960s and 1970s the Iraqi government did conservation and restoration work at the site. Unfortunately the modern restoration work resulted in significant damage to the original construction it overlaid as it did at Babylon. Aqar Quf is currently suffering environmental damage and urban encroachment. Natural factors like rain and standing groundwater have contributed to the erosion of the ziggurat and damage to the ruins, especially along the southwest side. As a result of this damage, the ziggurat is in danger of further deterioration as well as collapse if preventive measures are not taken. The suburbs and industrial areas of Baghdad also continue developing near the site. Currently, there is an encroachment of modern construction along some stretches of the enclosure wall. There is also agricultural encroachment along the enclosure wall, especially on the southwest side. Iraqi Army maneuvers, involving trenches, did some damage to the site in the 1980s.
The ziggurat suffered damage as a result of the U.S. invasion of Iraq when the site was abandoned and looted during the security breakdown and chaos that followed the U.S. military's overthrow of Saddam Hussein. Little is left of the modern administration building, museum, event stage, and restaurant that once served the picnickers and students who visited the site before the war. Local government officials and the U.S. military charged with security in the area have been working to create a renovation plan. Since mid-2008, local officials have drafted plans to rebuild the historic site, yet to be implemented.
An Iraqi-Italian Archaeological Expedition by the University of Bologna and the SBAH, under the direction of prof. Nicolò Marchetti, has been working at the site of Aqar Quf since the Fall of 2022. The systematic survey of the site has been completed and, since the Fall of 2024, systematic excavations have also begun in the palace and temple areas. A new conservation project "ArTourBagh" funded by AICS and coordinated by Marchetti started in the Spring of 2025 with the aim of protecting and enhancing the mudbrick remains at the site, while promoting the touristic and social development in the area.

Tell Basmaya
The site of Tell Basmaya lies about seven kilometers southeast of modern Baghdad at the Tigris-Diyala river junction and just to the northeast of ancient Dur-Kurigalzu. It covers an area of about 4 hectares and consists of eight mounds (ranging in height from 1 to 4.5 meters). All of the mounds have now been destroyed by modern development. It was first identified in a 1957-1958 regional survey by Robert Adams (site #562). It was worked for two seasons from 2013 to 2014 by the Iraqi State Board of Antiquities and Heritage, led by Taha K. Abod, in a program of rescue archaeology before the area was developed. Excavation occurred at four (5, 6, 7, 8) of the mounds only two of which (6 and 7) showed signs of occupation. On mound seven (0.96 hectares in area, 4 meters in height) eight sizable (five with 5 rooms, three with 13 rooms, one with 16 rooms) buildings were excavated. Ten fragmentary cuneiform tablets were found in those buildings with two tablets bearing year names (14th and 17th) of Kassite ruler Kadashman-Turgu (c. 1281–1264 BC) along with five cylinder seals and one sealing. One seal, of fossilized coral, contains the inscription "Marduk, have mercy on him". Small finds included metal daggers and chisels and a number of faience objects, including a face mask and three chariot fittings. Forty-four intramural and extramural graves were found including a brick tomb and a vaulted tomb. Some late Sassanian and early Arabic period remains were found including many Aramaic incantation bowls.

Gallery
The following images represent the status of Aqar-Quf and its architectural remains as of December 29, 2021.

See also
Cities of the ancient Near East
Chronology of the ancient Near East
Kassite deities
Kudurru

References
Further reading
al-BakRī, m.d., "The discovery of Julairid coins at ‘Aqar-qūf", Al-Maskūkat 3, pp. 77-80, 1972 (in arabic)
Al-Hadithi, A., "Archaeological excavations at Tell Abu Shijar ('Aqar Qūf). The first season 1992", Sumer 50, pp. 48–57, 2000 (Arabic section).
Al-Haik, A. R., "Key lists of archaeological excavations in Iraq : 1842 - 1965", Field Research Projects, Coconut Grove, Florida, 1968
Al-Haik, A. R., "Key lists of archaeological excavations in Iraq : II, 1966-1971", Field Research Projects, Coconut Grove, Florida, 1971
A. Al-Khayyat, "Aqar Quf. Capitale des Cassites", Dossiers d'Archéologie, no. 103, pp. 59–61, 1986
Al-tikriti, A., "Archaeological restoration at ‘Aqar qūf,  1960-1961", Sumer 26, pp. 73-81, 1970 (in Arabic)
Al-Zubaydi, M. H. R., "Unpublished cuneiform texts of the Middle Babylonian (Kassite) Period from 'Aqarqūf (Dūr Kurigalzu)", Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment for the degree of Magister at the University of Baghdad, Department of Archaeology. Baghdad, 2003
Taha Baqir, "Aqar Quf, Directorate General of Antiquities in Baghdad", 1959
J. A. Brinkman, "Assyrian merchants at Dūr-Kurigalzu", NABU 2001/73, 2001
[11] T Clayden, "Moulded Mud-Brick at Dur Kurigalzu", Al-Rafidan, vol. 21, pp. 71–83, 2000
T Clayden, "'Aqar Qūf before its excavation in 1942", Al-Rāfidān 31, pp. 1–31, 2010
O. R. Gurney, "Texts from Dur-Kurigalzu", Iraq, vol. 11, no. 1, pp.& 131–149, 1949
Seth Richardson, "The Collapse of a Complex State, A Reappraisal of the End of the First Dynasty of Babylon 1683-1597 B.C.", dissertation, Columbia University, 2002
Ridha, A. A. "New excavations in Agarguf." The Baghdad Observer 21, 1984
Walter Sommerfield, "The Kassites of Ancient Mesopotamian: Origins, Politics, and Culture", J. M. Sasson ed. Civilizations of the Ancient Near East, vol. 2, Charles Scribner's Sons, 1995

External links

Site photographs at Oxford
Centro Ricerche Archeologiche e Scavi di Torino Dur-Kurigalzu page
Global Heritage Fund has a page for Agar Quf



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
AL-UKHAIDIR FORTRESS
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: fortress
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:36:24


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 228
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Ukhaidir_Fortress
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Fortress of Al-Ukhaidir (Arabic: حصن الأخيضر) or Abbasid palace of Ukhaider is located roughly 50 km south of Karbala, Iraq.  It is a large, rectangular fortress erected in 775 AD with a unique defensive style. Constructed by the Abbasid caliph As-Saffah's nephew Isa ibn Musa, Ukhaidir represents Abbasid architectural innovation in the structures of its courtyards, residences and mosque. Excavations at Ukhaidir were conducted in the early 20th century by Gertrude Bell, who wrote the first major report on the remains. Ukhaidir was an important stop on regional trade routes, similar to Atshan and Mujdah. The complex comprises a primary hall, a large Iwan, a reception hall and servants quarters.  The fortress exemplifies Abbasid architecture in Iraq by demonstrating the "despotic and the pleasure-loving character of the dynasty" in its grand size but cramped living quarters.
The current name could be related to Isma'il ibn Yusuf al-Ukhaidhir from Banu Ukhaidhir who launched a rebellion against the Abbasid, then later he became the governor of Kufa with the support of Qarmatians.

World Heritage Status
This site was added to the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List on July 7, 2000, in the Cultural category.

Gallery
See also
List of castles in Iraq

Notes
References
Ukhaidir (Iraq) - About.com Archived 2009-09-27 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 2009-09-25.
Hillenbrand, R (1999), Islamic Art and Architecture, Thames and Hudson, 1999. ISBN 0-500-20305-9



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
DUR-KURIGALZU
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:36:33


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,695
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dur-Kurigalzu
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dur-Kurigalzu (modern `Aqar-Qūf عَقَرْقُوف in Baghdad Governorate, Iraq) was a city in southern Mesopotamia, near the confluence of the Tigris and Diyala rivers, about 30 kilometres (19 mi) west of the center of Baghdad. It was founded by a Kassite king of Babylon, Kurigalzu I (died c. 1375 BC) and was abandoned after the fall of the Kassite dynasty (c. 1155 BC). The city was of such importance that it appeared on toponym lists in the funerary temple of the Egyptian pharaoh, Amenophis III (c. 1351 BC) at Kom el-Hettan".  The prefix Dur is an Akkadian term meaning "fortress of", while the Kassite royal name Kurigalzu is believed to have meant "shepherd of the Kassites". The tradition of naming new towns Dur dates back to the Old Babylonian period with an example being  Dūr-Ammī-ditāna. The city contained a ziggurat and temples dedicated to Mesopotamian gods, as well as a royal palace which covered 420,000 square meters.
The ziggurat at Aqar Quf, standing to a height of about 52 metres (171 ft), has been a very visible ancient monument for centuries. For camel caravans and modern road traffic, the ziggurat has served as a signal of the near approach to Baghdad. Because of Aqar Quf's easy accessibility and close proximity to the city of Baghdad, it has been one of Iraq's most visited and best-known sites. The ziggurat was often confused with the Tower of Babel by Western visitors to the area from the 17th century onwards.

History
The town of Dur Kurigalzu was founded by the Kassite King Kurigalzu I in the early 14th century BC and is situated along an east–west-trending limestone ridge between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers. Until the last century, the adjacent Aqar Quf depression would have been inundated with flood water part of the year. This site had access to fresh water from the Euphrates by means of the Isa Canal, known as the Patti-Enlil Canal in ancient times. The city functioned as the capital of Babylonia during the reign of Kurigalzu, and either as the capital or at least an important city during the period after. It was occupied continuously until the fall of the Kassite Dynasty in the 12th century BC when it was largely abandoned. The temple area, at least, was known to be active in the 7th century BC and in the Neo-Babylonian period. Up until recently (mostly between the 9th and 14th centuries AD), there have been smaller occupations at parts of Aqar Quf, with areas of the site being used for burials and for Arab settlement. It has been suggested that in earlier times the site was named Esâ.

Ziggurat
The Ziggurat of Dur-Kurigalzu, built in the early 14th century BC by Kurigalzu I, is located in the city's western area and is devoted to the chief Babylonian God Enlil, who Sumerians believed to govern over wind, air, earth, and storm.
The ziggurat's base measures 69m x 67m and it was constructed of large, well-tempered liben with many stamped baked bricks incorporated into the structure, bearing the name of Kurigalzu and his dedication of the temple E-U-GAL to Enlil. Facing the front, the Ziggurat can be approached from three main staircases leading up to the first level. Standing upright on the level withholds a terraced compound, built by layers of receding levels. At its core, there are consistent sun-dried square bricks with reed mats placed in every seven layers of brick to help hold the structure altogether. An axial flight of steps was discovered running outwards from the center of the side of the ziggurat towards the temple-complex and was built of solid kiln-baked brick set in bitumen.

Archaeology
In Kassite times the area was defined by a wall that enclosed about 425 hectares (1,050 acres). The wall, originally built by Kurigalzu I, was later rebuilt by Kurigalzu II (c. 1332—1308 BC). The site has several defined areas, Mound A (100 meters south of the ziggurat), Tell Ahmar, Tell Abu Shijar, Tell al-Abyadh, and a private housing area. The main elements, ziggurat, palaces, etc. are all within the city wall. The currently known structures of the site consist of nine temples (T1 to T9), with T1 being the ziggurat and associated temple to Enlil, three palaces (P1 to T3), and five housing areas (H1 to H5)
The site was visited by Bengt Bengtsson Oxenstierna in 1616. Agar Quf first appeared on a modern map by Edward Ives in 1773. The site was then described by Claudius James Rich in 1811. Aqar Quf (referred to then as Akerkuf, Agger Koof, or Akar-kuf) was visited and examined in 1837 by Francis Rawdon Chesney. The name of Dur-Kurigalzu was identified by Henry Rawlinson in the mid-19th century.

Excavations were conducted from 1942 through 1945, by Taha Baqir and Seton Lloyd in a joint excavation by the Iraqi Directorate-General of Antiquities and the British School of Archaeology in Iraq. Over 100 cuneiform tablets of the Kassite period were recovered, now in the Iraq Museum. Some were date-able to the reigns of Burna-Buriash II and Kashtiliash IV. They also showed that two of the palaces were named the Palace of the Mountain Sheep and the Palace of the Stag. A kudurru (IM 49991) dated to year five of Kassite ruler Nazi-Maruttash was also found. During the excavation, 5 fragments of a larger-than-life-size statue were discovered. They contain the longest yet found Kassite Sumerian inscriptions.
A baked brick pavement (T5) around two kilometers northwest of Tell al-Abyadh was found to be covered with hundreds of broken terracotta figurines dedicated to the god Gula. Bricks found in situ were dated to the reign of Kassite ruler Nazi-Maruttash. The excavations included the ziggurat, three temples, and part of the palace of Dur-Kurigalzu II.

In the early 1960s and from 1968 to 1975 the Iraqi Directorate-General of Antiquities continued to do some excavation around the ziggurat as part of a restoration project under Saddam Hussein The three excavated areas are the mound of Aqar Quf (including the ziggurat and large temple), a public building (approximately 100 metres (330 ft) to the west), and Tell al-Abyadh where a large palace was partially uncovered (about 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) to the south-west). Several burned cuneiform tables dated to the reign of Marduk-apla-iddina I were found there. As part of a temple restoration a pottery jar was found containing 220 Islamic silver dirhem coins from the Ilkhanid period.
Excavations continued between 1977 and 1980, led by Suphi Anwar Rashid and Amire al-Khayyat, in the temple area. Paving and wall bricks dedicated to Enlil and Ninlil were found as well as a Kassite double jar burial, an inscribed eyestone for Enlil dedicated by Kurigalzu, and two female figurines in ivory.
Another area within Dur-Kurigalzu, Tell Abu Shijar, was excavated by Iraqi archaeologists in 1992, 1993, and 2001 finding mainly late Kassite and lesser Parthian/Sassanian remains. Painted plaster wall fragments, similar to those found at Tell al-Abyadh, were recovered as well as a worn cylinder seal and thirteen cuneiform clay tablets. The tablets were unread (and may be lost) but 3 were noted to have dates of the Kassite king Nazi-Maruttash (1307—1282 BC). The site lies 1 kilometer west of the ziggurat and 500 meters southwest of Tell al-Abyadh being about 6 meters in height with only the central 120-meter by 150-meter mound undisturbed by modern activity.
In the late-1960s an Italian team conducted a photogrammatic survey of the ziggurat.

Wall paintings at Tell al-Abyadh
Some of the most significant finds of Kassite period artwork are found in the main palatial complex (P1) and its surrounding complexes (located at Tell al-Abyadh) of Dur-Kurigalzu about 1000 meters northwest of the main ziggurat. The recurring motifs of the artwork found on all four levels of the palatial complex are representational and contain human processional scenes and clusters of fruit; there are also geometric designs that contain parallel bands, chevrons, and rosettes. The processional scenes date to the time of the last Kassite king Marduk-apla-iddina I. The representational motif of human figures is also some of the only surviving instances of human representation in artwork from the Kassite period and gives an indication of the artistic technique utilized at the time. The majority of large, upright wall paintings can be found in the internal rooms of the palace that would have functioned as reception or public rooms. The highest concentration of this wall painting type can be found in Unit H sector on Level II named also 'PaintedPalace', dating to the reign of Kaštiliaš IV.
Another wall painting type is also found along recesses of the courtyards and between rooms and contains the same motifs of floral and geometric designs and processional scenes that Yoko Tomabechi states function to 'brighten the doorways and the inner rooms'. The colours utilised in these paintings are 'red, cobalt-blue, dark-blue, yellow, white and black'. Much of the palatial complex and its artwork inside remain unexcavated and need further exploration. In January 2025 the site of Aqar Quf has been included in the Tentative List of UNESCO World Heritage Convention.

Temples
At the base of the ziggurat steps, is a pavement that leads to one of the four excavated temples, E-U-GAL. This would also continue to lead into a court and several smaller rooms adjoining it. The other three temples are E-GASAN-AN-TA-GAL, E-SAG-DINGIR-RI-E-NE, and E-SAG-DINGIR-E-NE. King Kurigalzu appears to have built all these temples under great patronage. The entire complex mostly has liben walls that are thickly covered with plaster and may bear traces of fire, which are thought to reflect attempts in destroying the site in the past.

E-U-GAL
E-U-GAL, which is likely to mean "The House of the Great Lord," is believed to be the most important temple of Dur Kurigalzu. This name could also refer to the entire temple complex or the entire site as the text was engraved into bricks in all three temples and in the ziggurat.

E-GASAN-AN-TA-GAL
The name of the temple is a combination of "The House of the Lady" and words meaning "high", "firm", or "great". Inside this temple is a small staircase that leads up to an altar, subsidiary courts, and a room that appears to be the kitchen where a raised rectangular compartment was excavated and assumed to be an oven.

Tower
Between E-GASAN-AN-TA-GAL and E-U-GAL is a massive ruin, excavated to be 17 meters tall, that could be the foundation of a tower that was weathered away by floods. This structure was also made with liben and faced with baked bricks.

Current status
For 16 seasons in the 1960s and 1970s the Iraqi government did conservation and restoration work at the site. Unfortunately the modern restoration work resulted in significant damage to the original construction it overlaid as it did at Babylon. Aqar Quf is currently suffering environmental damage and urban encroachment. Natural factors like rain and standing groundwater have contributed to the erosion of the ziggurat and damage to the ruins, especially along the southwest side. As a result of this damage, the ziggurat is in danger of further deterioration as well as collapse if preventive measures are not taken. The suburbs and industrial areas of Baghdad also continue developing near the site. Currently, there is an encroachment of modern construction along some stretches of the enclosure wall. There is also agricultural encroachment along the enclosure wall, especially on the southwest side. Iraqi Army maneuvers, involving trenches, did some damage to the site in the 1980s.
The ziggurat suffered damage as a result of the U.S. invasion of Iraq when the site was abandoned and looted during the security breakdown and chaos that followed the U.S. military's overthrow of Saddam Hussein. Little is left of the modern administration building, museum, event stage, and restaurant that once served the picnickers and students who visited the site before the war. Local government officials and the U.S. military charged with security in the area have been working to create a renovation plan. Since mid-2008, local officials have drafted plans to rebuild the historic site, yet to be implemented.
An Iraqi-Italian Archaeological Expedition by the University of Bologna and the SBAH, under the direction of prof. Nicolò Marchetti, has been working at the site of Aqar Quf since the Fall of 2022. The systematic survey of the site has been completed and, since the Fall of 2024, systematic excavations have also begun in the palace and temple areas. A new conservation project "ArTourBagh" funded by AICS and coordinated by Marchetti started in the Spring of 2025 with the aim of protecting and enhancing the mudbrick remains at the site, while promoting the touristic and social development in the area.

Tell Basmaya
The site of Tell Basmaya lies about seven kilometers southeast of modern Baghdad at the Tigris-Diyala river junction and just to the northeast of ancient Dur-Kurigalzu. It covers an area of about 4 hectares and consists of eight mounds (ranging in height from 1 to 4.5 meters). All of the mounds have now been destroyed by modern development. It was first identified in a 1957-1958 regional survey by Robert Adams (site #562). It was worked for two seasons from 2013 to 2014 by the Iraqi State Board of Antiquities and Heritage, led by Taha K. Abod, in a program of rescue archaeology before the area was developed. Excavation occurred at four (5, 6, 7, 8) of the mounds only two of which (6 and 7) showed signs of occupation. On mound seven (0.96 hectares in area, 4 meters in height) eight sizable (five with 5 rooms, three with 13 rooms, one with 16 rooms) buildings were excavated. Ten fragmentary cuneiform tablets were found in those buildings with two tablets bearing year names (14th and 17th) of Kassite ruler Kadashman-Turgu (c. 1281–1264 BC) along with five cylinder seals and one sealing. One seal, of fossilized coral, contains the inscription "Marduk, have mercy on him". Small finds included metal daggers and chisels and a number of faience objects, including a face mask and three chariot fittings. Forty-four intramural and extramural graves were found including a brick tomb and a vaulted tomb. Some late Sassanian and early Arabic period remains were found including many Aramaic incantation bowls.

Gallery
The following images represent the status of Aqar-Quf and its architectural remains as of December 29, 2021.

See also
Cities of the ancient Near East
Chronology of the ancient Near East
Kassite deities
Kudurru

References
Further reading
al-BakRī, m.d., "The discovery of Julairid coins at ‘Aqar-qūf", Al-Maskūkat 3, pp. 77-80, 1972 (in arabic)
Al-Hadithi, A., "Archaeological excavations at Tell Abu Shijar ('Aqar Qūf). The first season 1992", Sumer 50, pp. 48–57, 2000 (Arabic section).
Al-Haik, A. R., "Key lists of archaeological excavations in Iraq : 1842 - 1965", Field Research Projects, Coconut Grove, Florida, 1968
Al-Haik, A. R., "Key lists of archaeological excavations in Iraq : II, 1966-1971", Field Research Projects, Coconut Grove, Florida, 1971
A. Al-Khayyat, "Aqar Quf. Capitale des Cassites", Dossiers d'Archéologie, no. 103, pp. 59–61, 1986
Al-tikriti, A., "Archaeological restoration at ‘Aqar qūf,  1960-1961", Sumer 26, pp. 73-81, 1970 (in Arabic)
Al-Zubaydi, M. H. R., "Unpublished cuneiform texts of the Middle Babylonian (Kassite) Period from 'Aqarqūf (Dūr Kurigalzu)", Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment for the degree of Magister at the University of Baghdad, Department of Archaeology. Baghdad, 2003
Taha Baqir, "Aqar Quf, Directorate General of Antiquities in Baghdad", 1959
J. A. Brinkman, "Assyrian merchants at Dūr-Kurigalzu", NABU 2001/73, 2001
[11] T Clayden, "Moulded Mud-Brick at Dur Kurigalzu", Al-Rafidan, vol. 21, pp. 71–83, 2000
T Clayden, "'Aqar Qūf before its excavation in 1942", Al-Rāfidān 31, pp. 1–31, 2010
O. R. Gurney, "Texts from Dur-Kurigalzu", Iraq, vol. 11, no. 1, pp.& 131–149, 1949
Seth Richardson, "The Collapse of a Complex State, A Reappraisal of the End of the First Dynasty of Babylon 1683-1597 B.C.", dissertation, Columbia University, 2002
Ridha, A. A. "New excavations in Agarguf." The Baghdad Observer 21, 1984
Walter Sommerfield, "The Kassites of Ancient Mesopotamian: Origins, Politics, and Culture", J. M. Sasson ed. Civilizations of the Ancient Near East, vol. 2, Charles Scribner's Sons, 1995

External links

Site photographs at Oxford
Centro Ricerche Archeologiche e Scavi di Torino Dur-Kurigalzu page
Global Heritage Fund has a page for Agar Quf


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 1,038
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%B2%D9%82%D9%88%D8%B1%D8%A9_%D8%B9%D9%82%D8%B1%D9%82%D9%88%D9%81
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

زقورة عقرقوف وهي زقورة تَقع في العراق، قرب العاصمة بغداد، وكانت معلم إحدى المُدن في جنوب بلاد وادي الرافدين بالقرب من التقاء نهري دِجلة وديالى على بعد 30 كيلو متر (19 ميل) من غرب مركز بغداد، ولقد تأسست من قبل ملك الكيشين كوريغالزو الأول في القرن الرابع عشر قبل الميلاد، وكانت تُعتبر عاصمة الكيشين وأنتهت أهميتها بعد سقوط سلالة الكيشين، وتحتوي الزقورة على المعابد المكرسة لآلهة السومريين فضلاً عن القَصر الملكي، وليس من السهل الحفاظ عليها من اثار التقادم الزمني والاندثار، ويبلغ أرتفاع الزقورة نحو 170 قدم (52 م).

التاريخ
يعود تاريخ تأسيس الزقورة إلى ملك الكيشين كوريغالزو الأول في أواخر القرن الخامس عشر وأوائل القرن الرابع عشر قبل الميلاد، وتَقع الزقورة على طول تلال كلسة بين الشرق والغرب ونهر دجلة والفرات، وفي القرن الماضي غمرت مياه الفيضان زقورة عقرقوف وسبب الفيضان تحطيم بعض الأجزاء من الزقورة، ولعل مياه الفيضان قد كانت تفيد المدينة سابقا للدفاع والحماية، كما كانت تسقى من نهر عيسى المشهور، الذي كان يسمى في العهود البابلية بـ (قنال انليل)، وكانت الزقورة عاصمة للبلاد في عهد كوريكالزو في العصور القديمة، وبعد سقوط سلالة الكيشين فقدت مكانتها وأحتلت في القرن الثاني عشر قبل الميلاد وتركت وتخلى عنها إلى حد كبير. وأستمر الأستيطان والسكن في مدينة عقرقوف بعد سقوط الدولة الكيشية على يد العيلاميين، حيث أستوطنها الأراميين في عصر دولة بابل الحديثة ويعتقد أنهم هم من أطلقو تسمية عقرقوف، وأعادوا أعمار المدينة من جديد بعض تعرضها إلى هجمات الأشوريين المتكررة، وأستمر الأستيطان فيها حتى العصر العربي الإسلامي حيث أستوطنها المسلمين من القرن الثالث وحتى القرن الثامن عشر وما زال الأستيطان موجوداً إلى حد الآن حيث أن منطقة أبو غريب قريبة على موقع زقورة وتقطن فيها الآن عشائر عربية عراقية.

في زمن الكيشين كان يحيط الزقورة سور ضخم جداً يقدر بحوالي 225 هكتار (560 فداناً)،  والجوانب خلف السور من الضاحية الشرقية للزقورة كان يتواجد فيها هناك بحيرة من الماء، ويتواجد العديد من التلال حول الزقورة، وتعتبر زقورة عقرقوف من المباني التراثية والتاريخية في المنطقة، والزقورة كانت مُكرسة للإلهة الرئيسية وهم «أنليل» و«نينليل» و«نينورتا»، ولقد تأسست المعابد في الجنوب الشرقي من الزقورة وتَبين من خلال التنقيبات التي أجراها الباحثون الأثريون في بداية عقد الأربعينيات من القرن العشرين أن الملك كوريكالزو الثالث هو مؤسس هذهِ المعابد والتي تتكون من ساحات كبيرة يحيط بها عدد كبير من الحجرات والأورقة والممرات، وأعتماداً على الإدلة الأثرية المكتشفة في هذا الموقع تبين أن هذه المعابد استعملت من قبل الأدوار التي خلفت (الدور الكيشي) وهو العهد الأشوري والعهد البابلي الحديث (1000 ــ 500 ق.م)، ولقد شيد الملوك الكيشيين قصور المدينة المكتشفة في تل أبيض شمال غرب الزقورة وتدل الكتابات المسمارية التي عثر عليها في قصور المدينة بأسم قصور مدينة كويكالزو وتعرض معالم معمارية من مرافق قصور الملوك المهمة وهي ثلاثة أقببة متوازية إلى جانبي كل منها عدد من المخازن المعقودة بهيئة جيوب نصف دائرية، وقاعدة الزقورة مُربعة الشكل تقريباً أبعادها (69 × 67) وتتجه زواياها إلى الجهات الأربع وتميل أوجهها الأربعة عن العامود إلى الداخل بحوالي 9 سم لكل متر من الأرتفاع، وأوجه القاعدة مُغلقة من الخارج بغلاف من الآجر تزينه وتحليه هندسة معمارية على شكل نظام الطلعات والدخلات في أوجهها الأربعة، وتوجد ثلاث سلالم سلم وسطي وسلمان جانبيان يتصلان بها وتؤدي إلى سطح القاعدة المُربعة التي شيدتها المديرية العامة للآثار العراقية.

الزقورة
بُنيت زقورة عقرقوف في القرن الرابع عشر قبل الميلاد من قبل ملك الكيشين كوريغالزو الأول، وتحتوي الزقورة على مجموعة طبقات وتبدو الطبقات من البوري (حصير القصب) موضوعة في البناء بين كل 8 أو 9 مسافات من اللبن تتخللها ثقوب مربعة كبيرة تنفذ داخل الزقورة والهدف منها التخلص من الرطوبة والمياه التي تصيب الزقورة بين آونة وأخرى.
وكانت الزقورة مركزاً تجارياً لعدة قرون، حيث كانت تمر بها قوافل الأبل والتجارة على الطرق الحديثة، ويعتبر موقع الزقورة أحد المواقع المفضلة للنزهة من قبل العوائل البغدادية خصوصا في العطل ويوم الجمعة، وقد بُني مبنى مَتحف صغير بقربها في عام 1960 وأنشئ لتقديم الخدمات لزوار الموقع وهو الآن مُهمل.
بسبب قرب موقع زقورة عقرقوف إلى العاصمة بغداد، فقد مكنها ذلك من أن تصبح من الأماكن والمواقع العراقية التراثية الأكثر شهرة وزيارة.

الدراسة والبحث
تم أعطاء وَصف للموقع لأول مرة من قبل كلوديس جيمس ريش في عام 1811، ولقد تم زيارة زقورة عقرقوف في عام 1837 من قبل فرانسيس راودون تشيسيني، وتعرف على أسم زقورة عقرقوف التي كتب عنها هنري رولينسون في منتصف القرن التاسع عشر ميلادي.

أجريت عمليات حَفر وتنقيب في الأعوام 1942-1945 من قبل الباحث العراقي طه باقر مع الباحث الإنكليزي سيتون لويد وكان العمل مُشترك بين المديرية العامة للآثار العراقية والمدرسة البريطانية للآثار في العراق. وكُشف عن أكثر من 100 لوح مكتوب بالخط المسماري في فترة عهد الكيشين، والألواح موجودة حاليا في قاعات المتحف الوطني العراقي.
وشملت الحفريات والتنقيب، مبنى الزقورة والمعابد الثلاث وجزء من قصر زقورة عقرقوف الثانية، وواصلت المديرية العامة للآثار العراقية القيام ببعض أعمال الحفر حول مبنى الزقورة كجزء من مشروع الترميم والصيانة في عهد الرئيس العراقي السابق صدام حسين، وفي عام 1970 أعيد بناءها في المرحلة الدنيا من الهيكل، المناطق الثلاثة المجاورة إلى زقورة عقرقوف (تتضمن الزقورة والمعابد) والمباني العامة (حوالي 100 متر إلى الجنوب الغربي)، والتل الأبيض كان قصر كبير جداً، وكانت الزقورة مكونة من طبقات من الحصير القصب التي كانت تمسك هيكل البناء لكي لا يَقع، وعُثر على العديد من الأعمال الرئيسية المعروفة حالياً من فترة عهد الكيشين داخل قصر تل الآبيض وموجود هناك في عقرقوف، ولقد تم حَفر وأستكشاف تل أبو شجر من قبل علماء الآثار العراقية ونشرت النتائج.

الوضع الحالي
تعاني زقورة عقرقوف حالياً من الأضرار البيئية والزحف العمراني أو التوسع العمراني وقد أدت عوامل طبيعية مثل الأمطار والمياة الجوفية إلى تآكل الزقورة ولحوق الآضرار بها، وخصوصاً على طول الجانب الجنوبي الغربي، ونتيجة لهذا الضرر فأن الزقورة في خطر ومزيد من التدهور وكذلك الأنهيار ما لم يَتخد أجراءات وتدابير وقائية، وتستمر الضواحي والمناطق الصناعية في بغداد على التطوير والتوسع بالقرب من الموقع، وايضاً يوجد التوسع الزراعي على الموقع، وفي عام 1980 كان يوجد مناورات إلى الجيش العراقي مما سُبب في تضرر الزقورة.
تضررت الزقورة من الغزو الأمريكي للعراق وتعرضت للنهب والهمل خلال أنهيار الأمن وانعيام الفوضى التي أعقبت الإطاحة بالنظام العراقي الذي كان يرأسهُ صدام حسين، وبقي القليل من مبنى حديث الإدارة والمتحف والمطعم الذي خدم المتنزهين والطلاب الذين زارو الموقع قبل الحرب، في منتصف عام 2008 صاغ مسؤولون محليون خطط لإعادة بناء الموقع التاريخي، وفي عام 2013 قامت المديرية العامة للآثار العراقية بعملية صيانة زقورة عقرقوف وكانت عملية التأهيل تأتي ضمن فعاليات مشروع بغداد عاصمة الثقافة العربية في عام 2013.

معرض الصور
انظر أيضًا
زقورة أور

المصادر
مراجع عربية

مراجع إنكليزية


== قراءة مُتعمقة ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,178
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%C3%BBr-Kurigalzu
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dûr-Kurigalzu était une ville de la Mésopotamie antique, dont les ruines se trouvent sur le site actuel d'‘Aqar Qūf (en arabe : عقرقوف), localisé à 30 km à l’ouest de Bagdad, fondée par un roi de la dynastie kassite de Babylone nommé Kurigalzu (probablement le premier des deux ayant porté ce nom), vers 1400 av. J.-C.
Le site s'étend sur environ 225 hectares protégés par une enceinte, comprenant plusieurs tells, sur une terrasse calcaire bordant l'Euphrate. Dans l'Antiquité elle était également bordée par un canal, appelé Patti-Enlil, qui rejoignait à l'est la ville de Sippar. Le tell principal, ‘Aqar Qūf, est le centre religieux, tandis que les deux autres tells majeur sont le tell al-Abyad, 1 kilomètre à l'ouest du précédent, comprenant un palais royal, ainsi que le tell A, situé entre les deux à une centaine de mètres du premier.
Les tells principaux ont été fouillés entre 1942 et 1945 par une équipe irakienne et britannique dirigée par Taha Baqir et Seton Lloyd. Les résultats des fouilles n'ont été publiés que dans des rapports préliminaires et n'ont pas fait l'objet de publications définitives. Une grande partie du matériel qui y a été exhumé, conservé au Musée de Bagdad après les fouilles, reste également non publié. Comme souvent, seuls les quartiers officiels ont fait l'objet de fouilles, et l'urbanisme de cette vaste cité nouvelle n'est pas connu.

Historique
Comme son nom l'indique, Dūr-Kurigalzu/« Fort Kurigalzu » a été fondée par un roi nommé Kurigalzu. Deux souverains de la dynastie kassite ayant porté ce nom, un doute a subsisté sur l'identité du fondateur. Mais il est désormais admis qu'il s'agit du premier, qui a régné autour de 1400 av. J.-C. jusqu'aux environs de 1375 av. J.-C., et fut un des plus prolifiques bâtisseurs de sa dynastie, actif dans la plupart des grandes villes de Babylonie, car la ville est mentionnée dans un texte daté du règne de Burna-Buriash II, le père du second Kurigalzu.
Le site d'Aqar Quf a été habité avant le règne de Kurigalzu Ier, au moins au XVe siècle av. J.-C., l'agglomération s'appelant alors Parsâ (idéogrammes KUR.TIKI). Les constructions entreprises par Kurigalzu l'inscrivent dans la continuité des fondations royales mésopotamiennes plus anciennes, mais le site est remarquable par son étendue par rapport aux créations urbaines antérieures. Comme souvent on ne sait pas exactement pourquoi cette décision a été prise. En tout état de cause, cela n'a pas empêché Babylone de rester la principale ville du royaume, même si Dur-Kurigalzu a sans doute été une résidence royale importante pour les rois kassites.
La ville semble avoir été largement désertée après la chute de la dynastie au milieu du XIIe siècle av. J.-C., et n'aura donc connu qu'une occupation de deux siècles et demi environ. Elle est néanmoins encore mentionnée par la suite, notamment parmi les prises du roi assyrien Teglath-Phalasar Ier (1116-1077), ou les conquêtes des Araméens sous le roi babylonien Adad-apla-iddina (vers 1069-1048 av. J-C), et apparaît encore dans la première moitié du Ier millénaire av. J.-C. sous le nom abrégé Dur-Galzu.

La ziggurat et les temples
Le complexe religieux de Dur-Kurigalzu est dédié au grand dieu Enlil. Il est dominé par une ziggurat (nom cérémoniel en sumérien é-gi-rin, « Demeure pure ») très ruinée mais dont le cœur a subsisté. Sa base, quasiment carrée, mesurait 69 mètres sur 67,60, et devait s'élever jusqu'à 70 mètres de haut ; elles font encore 57 mètres de haut de nos jours, état de conservation remarquable pour une ziggurat. Elle comprenait un escalier principal, central, et deux escaliers latéraux, suivant la configuration courante pour les ziggurats du Sud de la Mésopotamie. Sa première terrasse, encore bien conservée au moment des fouilles et restaurée à l'issue de celles-ci, s'élève à 33 mètres de hauteur. Elle est construite en briques d'argiles, renforcées par différents dispositifs, notamment un ancrage de cordes de roseaux tressées courant sur toute sa longueur.
Le temple principal du site, mal conservé, comprenait au moins trois cours principales entourées de pièces. Sa partie centrale était le sanctuaire d'Enlil (é-u-gal, « Demeure du Grand Seigneur ») tandis que celle au nord-est était dédiée à son épouse Ninlil (é-gašan-an-ta-gal, « Demeure de la Dame élevée ») et le secteur sud-ouest à leur fils Ninurta (é-sag-dingir-re-e-ne, « Demeure principale des Dieux »). Cet ensemble, construit dans les formes traditionnelles de la Mésopotamie, est remarquable par l’ampleur de la conception.

Le palais royal
Le palais (é-gal-ki-šár-ra, « Palais de la Totalité (de l'Univers) »), incomplètement dégagé, était tout aussi massif, mais introduit des formes plus nouvelles. Les différents corps de bâtiment, organisés traditionnellement autour d’un grand espace central, couvrent à peu près 420 000 m2 : aucun palais n’avait atteint une telle ampleur. La voûte semble avoir été utilisée systématiquement pour couvrir les salles du premier niveau (première utilisation sur des portées atteignant 7 m). L'unité principale, appelée unité A, comprenait trois groupes de pièces organisés autour de cours, ainsi qu'une vaste cour carrée. L’ampleur de l’ouvrage, le grand nombre d’unités, l’existence d’un portique en maçonnerie, d'une trésor constitué d'un corridor bordé par des chambres voûtées, les longues processions de personnages peints sur les murs forment un ensemble tout à fait nouveau qui ne semble pas avoir eu de postérité.
Suivant une interprétation proposée par J.-W. Meyer, l'édifice comprenait en tout huit unités distinctes, chacune dédiée à une tribu kassite. L'édifice semblerait avoir été employé notamment lors de cérémonies d'intronisation des souverains kassites, qui venaient y recevoir l'hommage des principaux dignitaires de leur peuple après avoir été investis rois de Babylone dans la capitale traditionnelle. Cela renverrait aux processions peintes, représentant sans doute les dignitaires.
Quelques tablettes administratives ont été dégagées dans l'édifice (une quarantaine a été publiée), qui a par ailleurs livré plusieurs trouvailles artistiques, notamment des sculptures en terre cuite et en calcaire, des fragments d'objets en matières vitreuses, des bijoux en or.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
A. A. al-Khayyat, « Aqar Quf : capitale des Cassites », Dossiers Histoires et Archéologie, no 103 « La Babylonie »,‎ mars 1986, p. 59-61
(en) H. Kühne, « ʿAqar Quf », dans E. M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, Volume 1, Oxford et New York, 1997, p. 156-157
(en) T. Clayden, « Kurigalzu I and the Restoration of Babylonia », dans Iraq 58, 1996, p. 109-121
(de) J.-W. Meyer, « Der Palast von Aqar Quf: Stammesstrukturen in der kassitischen Gesellschaft », dans B. Böck, E. Cancik-Kirschbaum et T. Richter (dir.), Munuscula Mesopotamica, Festschrift für Johannes Renger, Münster, 1999, p. 317-326
(en) Tim Clayden, « Dūr-Kurigalzu: New Perspectives », dans Alexa Bartelmus et Katja Sternitzke, Karduniaš: Babylonia under the Kassites, Boston et Berlin, De Gruyter, 2017, p. 437–478
(en) Helen Malko, « Dūr-Kurigalzu: Insights from Unpublished Iraqi Excavation Reports », dans Alexa Bartelmus et Katja Sternitzke, Karduniaš: Babylonia under the Kassites, Boston et Berlin, De Gruyter, 2017, p. 479–491

Annexes
Lien interne
Dynastie kassite de Babylone

Lien externe
(en) « Aqar Quf (ancient: Dur Kurigalzu) », sur U.S. Department of Defense Legacy Resource Mangement Program (DoDLRMP)
 Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Mésopotamie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SIPPAR
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:36:41


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,602
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sippar
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sippar (Sumerian: 𒌓𒄒𒉣𒆠, Zimbir) (also Sippir or Sippara) was an ancient Near Eastern Sumerian and later Babylonian city on the east bank of the Euphrates river. Its tell is located at the site of modern Tell Abu Habbah near Yusufiyah in Iraq's Baghdad Governorate, some 69 km (43 mi) north of Babylon and 30 km (19 mi) southwest of Baghdad. The city's ancient name, Sippar, could also refer to its sister city, Sippar-Amnanum (located at the modern site of Tell ed-Der); a more specific designation for the city here referred to as Sippar was Sippar-Yaḫrurum (Sippar-Jaḫrurum). The name comes from the Amorite Yaḫrurum tribe that lived in the area along with the Amorite Amnanum tribe. In Sippar was the site where the Babylonian Map of the World was found.

History
While pottery finds indicate that the site of Sippar was in use as early as the Uruk period, substantial occupation occurred only in the Early Dynastic and Akkadian Empire periods of the 3rd millennium BC, the Old Babylonian and Kassite periods of the 2nd millennium BC, and the Neo-Babylonian times of the 1st millennium BC. Lesser levels of use continued into the time of the Achaemenid, Seleucid and Parthian Empires.

Early Bronze Age
Despite the fact that thousands of cuneiform clay tablets have been recovered at the site, relatively little is known about the history of Sippar. In the Sumerian king list a king of Sippar, En-men-dur-ana, is listed as one of the early pre-dynastic rulers of the region but has not yet turned up in the epigraphic records.

Akkadian period
Sippar was the cult site of the sun god (Sumerian Utu, Akkadian Shamash), along with his consort Aya, and the home of his temple E-babbara (𒂍𒌓𒌓𒊏, means "white house") where the Cruciform Monument of Manishtushu was found. Mamu, the daughter of Shamash, also had a temple in Sippar as did the goddesses Nin-Isina, Ninḫegal, Ninkarrak, and Tašmētum.
In the later part of the 3rd millennium BC, a large coalition of city-states led by Iphur-Kis of Kish (Sumer) and Amar-Girid of Uruk, joined by Enlil-nizu of Nippur, and including the city-states of "Kutha, TiWA, Sippar, Kazallu, Kiritab, [Api]ak   and GN" as well as "Amorite  [hi]ghlanders" revolted against Akkadian Empire ruler Naram-Sin of Akkad. The rebellion was joined by the city of Borsippa, among others. The revolt was crushed.

Middle Bronze Age
Sippar was the production center of wool. It also produced some of the finest Old Babylonian cylinder seals.

Middle Bronze I
In Middle Bronze IB (c. 1900-1820 BC), the city-state of Babylon started to expand. Sippar eventually came within the Babylonian realm. Sumu-la-El of Babylon (r. 1878-1843 BC) conducted several military campaigns gaining control over Sippar. In his 29th year of reign, Sumulael reported building the city wall of Sippar. Sabium (r. 1842-1829 BC) did some religious activity dedicated to Utu/Shamash, Marduk in one of his year-names. Apil-Sin (r. 1828-1812 BC) did some activity in Sippar in his Year 14.
Based on Shamash Temple records Sippar ruler Immerum is known to have been roughly contemporary with the rule of Sumu-la-El. He is suggested to have been ruling Sippar when Babylon took control based on a text sealed with oaths to both Immerum and Sumu-la-El. In another text detailing gifts for dignitaries Sumu-abum, first ruler of the First Babylonian Empire received the largest gift with Immerum and Sumu-la-El (2nd ruler of that empire) receiving smaller gifts. Four year names of Immerum are known including "The year (in which) the temple of Inanna Immerum built".

Middle Bronze II (c. 1820-1587 BC)
Sin-Muballit (r. 1811-1793 BC) controlled the city and a sealed clay envelope is known.

Some years later Hammurabi of Babylon (r. 1792-1750 BC) reported laying the foundations of the city wall of Sippar in his 23rd year and worked on the wall again in his 43rd year. His successor in Babylon, Samsu-iluna (r. 1749-1712 BC) worked on Sippar's wall in his 1st year. The city walls, being typically made of mud bricks, required much attention. The Code of Hammurabi stele was probably erected at Sippar. Shamash was the god of justice, and he is depicted handing authority to the king in the image at the top of the stele.
The city flourished under Babylonian rule until the Sack of Babylon by Mursili I of Hatti around 1587 BC.

Late Bronze Age
Kassite period
The city then came under the control of the Kassite dynasty.

Elamite period
In the final years of that dynasty the Elamite ruler Shutruk-Nakhunte (c. 1184 to 1155 BC) captured Sippar. Shutruk-Nakhunte carried back statues from the Shamash temple to Susa adding his own inscription to a stele of the Akkadian Empire ruler Naram-Sin:

"I am Shutruk-Nahhunte, son of Hallutush-Inshushinak, beloved servant of the god Inshushinak, king of Anshan and Susa, who has enlarged the kingdom, who takes care of the lands of Elam, the lord of the land of Elam. When the god Inshushinak gave me the order, I defeated Sippar. I took the stele of Naram-Sin and carried it off, bringing it to the land of Elam. For Inshushinak, my god, I set it as an offering."

Iron Age
Neo-Babylonian period
In the succeeding Late Bronze Age collapse period, it was taken by the Neo-Babylonian ruler Nebuchadnezzar I about 1120 BC. In the reign of Neo-Babylonian ruler Adad-apla-iddina (c. 1064–1043 BC) the Shamash cult center along with all the other temples in Sippar were destroyed by Suteans and cult symbol of Shamash was lost.

Neo-Assyrian period
In the early 1st millennium BC, Sippar came under Neo-Assyrian control. After the final defeat of the Neo-Assyrians by the Neo-Babylonians at the Battle of Carchemish in 605 BC text report that a number of Egyptian and Assyrian prisoners were brought to Sippar as chattel. Records of Neo-Babylonian ruler Nebuchadnezzar II (605-562 BC) and Nabonidos (556-539 BC) record that they repaired the Shamash temple E-babbara.

Achaemenid period
After the Battle of Opis in September 539 BC Sippar surrendered to the Achaemenid Empire, followed soon after by the fall of the Neo-Babylonian empire.

Speculation
Xisuthros, the "Chaldean Noah" in Sumerian mythology, is said by Berossus to have buried the records of the antediluvian world here—possibly because the name of Sippar was supposed to be connected with sipru, "a writing". And according to Abydenus, Nebuchadnezzar II excavated a great reservoir in the neighbourhood.
Pliny (Natural History 6.30.123) mentions a sect of Chaldeans called the Hippareni. It is often assumed that this name refers to Sippar (especially because the other two schools mentioned seem to be named after cities as well: the Orcheni after Uruk, and the Borsippeni after Borsippa), but this is not universally accepted.
Sippar has been suggested as the location of the Biblical Sepharvaim in the Old Testament, which alludes to the two parts of the city in its dual form.

Archaeology
Tell Abu Habba, measuring over 1 square kilometer was first excavated by Hormuzd Rassam (referring to the site as Aboo-Habba) between 1880 and 1881 for the British Museum in a dig that lasted 18 months. Rassam excavated only down to the Old Babylonian levels and was focused mainly on the Neo-Babylonian remains. Tens of thousands of tablets were recovered including the Tablet of Shamash in the Temple of Shamash/Utu. Most of the tablets were Neo-Babylonian. The temple had been mentioned as early as the 18th year of Samsu-iluna of Babylon, who reported restoring "Ebabbar, the temple of Szamasz in Sippar", along with the city's ziggurat.
The tablets, which ended up in the British Museum, are being studied to this day. As was often the case in the early days of archaeology, excavation records were not made, particularly find spots. This makes it difficult to tell which tablets came from Sippar-Amnanum as opposed to Sippar. Other tablets from Sippar were bought on the open market during that time and ended up at places like the British Museum and the University of Pennsylvania. Since the site is relatively close to Baghdad, it was a popular target for illegal excavations.
In 1894, Sippar was worked briefly by Jean-Vincent Scheil. The tablets recovered, mainly Old Babylonian, went to the Istanbul Museum. In 1927 archaeologists Walter Andrae and Julius Jordan visited, and mapped, the site. In modern times, the site was worked, mainly soundings, by a Belgian team led by H. Gasche from 1972 to 1973. They determined that Sippar was protected by a wall, partially for flood protection, extending 1200 meters by 800 meters, cutting a trench across it. A tablet of Samsu-iluna was found showing the wall dated back to at least Old Babylonian period though ground water prevented deeper excavation.

Iraqi archaeologists from the College of Arts at the University of Baghdad, led by Walid al-Jadir with Farouk al-Rawi, have excavated at Tell Abu Habbah starting in 1978. Work began with a new site contour map and excavation in the Old Babylonian area in the north where two buildings were uncovered. About 100 Old Babylonian period cuneiform tablets were found. Subsequently, the team worked in an Old Babylonian residential area where terracotta plaques and figurines, and cuneiform tablets were found. The tablets were from the reign of Immerum, Buntahun-ila, and Samsu-iluna. Focus then shifted to the Shamash temple area. In the northeast, Old Babylonian part of the site, a 30 meter by 5 meter deep sounding was excavated. The sounding found 4 Old Babylonian levels, 2 Akkadian Empire levels, and 3 Early Dynastic levels ( with plano-convex mud brick construction). In 1986, while clearing spoil from the Rassam excavation in the E-Babbar temple, a room was discovered which Rassam had not noticed. It contained a library with about 400 cuneiform tablets, which had been stored in 10 ranks of 17cm by 30cm niches in 4 rows. The tablets included copies of earlier inscriptions dating back to the Akkadian Empire and contemporary texts as late as the reign of Cambyses II. Few of the tablets were published at the time due to conditions in Iraq. With conditions improving, they are now being published. After 2000, they were joined by the German Archaeological Institute. In total, the effort continued in 24 seasons until 2002. In the 24th season in 2002, 700 cuneiform
tablets were found in one important building in the center of town. Most date to the
reign of Ammi-Saduqa (c. 1646–1626 BC) a ruler of the First Dynasty of Babylon with 
a few from Abi-Eshuh (c. 1711-1684 BC) and Ammi-Ditana (c. 1683-1647 BC).

Gallery
List of rulers
The following list should not be considered complete:

See also
List of cities of the ancient Near East
Cylinders of Nabonidus
Nadītu in Sippar

Notes
Further reading
F. N. H. al-Rawi, "Tablets from the Sippar Library I. The "Weidner Chronicle": A Suppositious Royal Letter concerning a Vision", Iraq, vol. 52, pp. 1–15, 1990
F. N. H. al-Rawi and A. R. George, "Tablets from the Sippar Library II. Tablet II of the Babylonian Creation Epic", Iraq, vol. 52, pp. 149–158, 1990
F. N. H. al-Rawi and A. R. George, "Tablets from the Sippar Library III. Two Royal Counterfeits", Iraq, vol. 56, pp. 135–149, 1994
Luc Dekier, "Old Babylonian real estate documents from Sippar in the British Museum", University of Ghent, 1994
F. N. H. al-Rawi and A. R. George, "Tablets from the Sippar Library IV. Lugale", Iraq, vol. 57, pp. 199–224, 1995
Rivkah Harris, "Ancient Sippar : a demographic study of an old-Babylonian city, 1894-1595 B.C.", Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Instituut, 1975
Harris, Rivkah, "On Foreigners in Old Babylonian Sippar", Revue d'Assyriologie et d'archéologie orientale 70.2, pp. 145-152, 1976
John MacGinnis, "Letter orders from Sippar and the administration of the Ebabbara in the late-Babylonian period", Bonami, 1995, ISBN 83-85274-07-3
MacGinnis, John, "The Royal Establishment at Sippar in the 6th Century BC", Zeitschrift für Assyriologie und Vorderasiatische Archäologie, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 198-219, 1994
F. N. H. al-Rawi and A. R. George, "Tablets from the Sippar Library V. An Incantation from Mis Pi", Iraq, vol. 57, pp. 225–228, 1995
[10]F. N. H. Al-Rawi and Andrew George, "Tablets from the Sippar Library, VI. Atra-hasis", Iraq, vol. 58, pp. 147–190, 1996
A. C. V. M. Bongenaar, "The Neo-Babylonian Ebabbar Temple at Sippar : its administration and its prosopography", Nederlands Historisch-Archeologisch Instituut te Istanbul, 1997, ISBN 90-6258-081-5
Bloch, Yigal, "Judeans in Sippar and Susa during the First Century of the Babylonian Exile: Assimilation and Perseverance under Neo-Babylonian and Achaemenid Rule", Journal of Ancient Near Eastern History, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 119-172, 2014
[11]F. N. H. al-Rawi and A. R. George, "Tablets from the Sippar Library VII. Three wisdom texts", Iraq, vol. 60, pp. 187–206, 1998
Ivan Starr and F. N. H. Al-Rawi, "Tablets from the Sippar Library VIII. Omens from the Gall-Bladder", Iraq, vol. 61, pp. 173–185, 1999
W. Horowitz and F. N. H. Al-Rawi, "Tablets from the Sippar library IX. A ziqpu-star planisphere", Iraq, vol. 63, pp. 171–181, 2001
F. N. H. al-Rawi, "Tablets from the Sippar library X: A dedication of Zabaya of Larsa", Iraq, vol. 64, pp. 247–248, 2002
De Graef, Katrien, "Cherchez la femme!: The Economic Role of Women in Old Babylonian Sippar", The Role of Women in Work and Society in the Ancient Near East, edited by Brigitte Lion and Cécile Michel, Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, pp. 270-295, 2016
[12]Andrew George and Khalid Salim Ismail, "Tablets from the Sippar library, XI. The Babylonian almanac", Iraq, vol. 64, pp. 249–258, 2002
Greengus, Samuel, "New evidence on the Old Babylonian calendar and real estate documents from Sippar", Journal of the American Oriental Society, pp. 257-267, 2001
Nils P. Heeßel and Farouk N. H. Al-Rawi, "Tablets from the Sippar Library XII. A Medical Therapeutic Text", Iraq, vol. 65, pp. 221–239, 2003
[13]F. N. H. Al-Rawi and A. R. George, "Tablets from the Sippar Library XIII: "Enūma Anu Ellil" XX", Iraq, vol. 68, pp. 23–57, 2006
Moore, Stephen A., "Ransom and Quittance in Early Old Babylonian Sippar: a New Text", Revue d’assyriologie et d’archéologie orientale 116.1, pp. 69-78, 2022
Theophilus Goldridge Pinches, "The Antiquities found by Mr. H. Rassam at Abu-habbah (Sippara)", Harrison and Sons, 1884
[14]Robert J. Lau, "The Abu Habba cylinder of Nabuna'id, v. Rawlinson pl. 64. Autographed text by Robert J. Lau, with an introd. and a glossary in English and German by J. Dyneley Prince", Leiden E.J. Brill, 1905
K. De Graef, "Many a mickle makes a muckle : advance payments in the Ur-Utu archive (Old Babylonian Sippar)", AKKADICA, vol. 137, no. 1, pp. 1–51, 2016
Janssen, Caroline, "Thirteen bones and a skeleton: the location of Inanna-mansum's grave and material manifestations of the cult of the dead in Old Babylonian Sippar", Akkadica 143, pp. 59-100, 2022
Reinhard Pirngruber, "Minor Archives from First-Millennium Bce Babylonia: The Archive of Iššar-Tarībi from Sippar", Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 72, pp. 165–198, 2020
[15]Richardson, Seth, "Hard Times for Sippar Women: Three Late Old Babylonian Cases", Journal of Ancient Near Eastern History 9.2, pp. 319-350, 2022
Tanret, Michel, "The seal of the sanga: on the Old Babylonian sangas of Šamaš of Sippar-Jaḫrūrum and Sippar-Amnānum", Vol. 40. Brill, 2010 ISBN 978-9004179585
[16]Van Koppen, Frans, and Denis Lacambre, "Sippar and the Frontier between Ešnunna and Babylon. New Sources for the History of Ešnunna in the Old Babylonian Period", Jaarbericht van het Vooraziatisch-Egyptisch Genootschap Ex Oriente Lux 41, pp. 151-177, 2009
Verhulst, Astrid, "An Old Babylonian Seal from Sippar with Trading Owners", Journal of Near Eastern Studies, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 255–65, 2015
Zawadzki, Stefan, "Great Families of Sippar during the Chaldean and Early Persian Periods (626-482 BC)", Revue d'Assyriologie et d'archéologie orientale, pp. 17-25, 1990

External links
German Archaeological Institute page for Sippar - in German
Year Names mentioning Sippar at CDLI
Digital images of Sippar cuneiform tablets - CDLI


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 2,288
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sippar
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sippar (sans doute plutôt prononcé Sippir dans l'Antiquité, écrit Zimbir en idéogramme sumérien) est une ville de la Mésopotamie antique, située au nord-ouest de Babylone, sur le site actuel d'Abu Habbah. Il s'agit d'une des villes les plus importantes de la Babylonie des IIe millénaire av. J.-C. et Ier millénaire av. J.-C., où se trouvait l'un des principaux sanctuaires de Shamash, le Dieu du Soleil. Ce site a livré des dizaines de milliers de tablettes cunéiformes, ce qui en fait un des sites antiques les mieux documentés par l'épigraphie.
Une autre ville portait le nom de Sippar, située à sept kilomètres à peine de la première (ce qui en fait plutôt une sorte de faubourg), sur l'actuel site de Tell ed-Der. Pour les distinguer les textes antiques appellent souvent la première « Sippar de Shamash » et la seconde « Sippar d'Annunitum », suivant leurs divinités tutélaires.

Historique
La ville de Sippar est citée comme l'une des plus anciennes de la Mésopotamie dans la Liste royale sumérienne. Elle aurait été la quatrième ville a exercer la royauté, l'avant-dernière avant le Déluge. Cette dynastie ne comporte qu'un roi, Enmenduranna, qui aurait régné vingt-et-un mille ans. Comme souvent avec cette source, il s'agit probablement d'une fiction. Les niveaux anciens des deux villes ayant porté le nom de Sippar ne sont pas connus, et l'archéologie ne peut confirmer l'ancienneté de cette ville.
Le site d'Abu Habbah a livré des objets semblant attester d'une occupation dès la période d'Uruk, dans la seconde moitié du IVe millénaire av. J.-C. Mais les phases les plus anciennes du site ne sont pas connues par l'archéologie. Les textes semblent indique que Sippar devient une ville importante dans le courant du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C.
C'est au début du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. que la ville devient l'une des plus importantes de la Mésopotamie méridionale. C'est alors que se développe la cité jumelle portant également le nom de Sippar, sur le site de Tell ed-Der. Les deux villes sont distinguées de plusieurs manières : Abu Habbah est appelée tantôt Sippar de Shamash, d'autres fois Sippar des Yahrurum (une tribu amorrite), Sippar de la steppe ; ed-Der est appelée Sippar d'Annunitum, Sippar des Amnanum (une autre tribu), Sippar de la muraille. Les villes ont connu une période d'indépendance après la chute de la troisième dynastie d'Ur, car une série de rois semblant régner autour de 1900 av. J.-C. est connue par quelques textes, qui ne permettent pas de clarifier leur ordre de succession : Altinu'u, Immerum, Buntahtun-ila, et Sîn-bani. Mais Sippar passe ensuite sous la domination du royaume voisin de Babylone, sans doute sous le règne de Sumu-la-El (1881 à 1845 av. J.-C.), pour ne plus jamais la quitter. Les souverains de Babylone ont été particulièrement actif dans cette grande ville proche de leur capitale, dont ils restaurent à plusieurs reprises les édifices principaux. Hammurabi dispose par ailleurs d'un palais à Sippar d'Annunitum où il réside à plusieurs reprises.
Sippar reste florissante lors de la période suivante de l'histoire babylonienne, sous les Kassites qui entretiennent à leur tour le sanctuaire de Shamash. Après la chute de cette dynastie la Babylonie connaît une période très troublée, avec notamment les incursions de tribus araméennes et chaldéennes, qui affectent particulièrement Sippar et son temple principal. Cette situation critique est connue par un document exceptionnel, la « Tablette du Dieu-Soleil », une inscription du roi Nabu-apla-iddina (888 à 855 av. J.-C.) qui rétablit le culte du temple de Shamash, en lui procurant une nouvelle statue de culte et en offrant des exemptions au sanctuaire, après une longue période d'arrêt du culte.
La prospérité de la ville sous l'empire néo-babylonien (626-539 av. J.-C.) et au début de l'époque des Perses Achéménides (539-480 av. J.-C.) est connue par les abondantes archives du temple de Shamash, qui documentent notamment sa vie économique. L'autre Sippar semble en revanche avoir perdu en importance, bien que le temple d'Annunitu soit encore restauré par Nabonide (555-539 av. J.-C.) et qu'elle soit encore occupée à l'époque perse. Une troisième Sippar apparaît dans quelques textes d'époque récente, Sippar-Aruru, qui semble localisée au nord-est des deux autres Sippar, près d'Opis ; il semble en fait que ce soit un autre nom de la ville appelée Dur-Sharruku/Dur-Sharrukin (à ne pas confondre avec la ville assyrienne de même nom) qui apparaît plus souvent dans les textes, depuis la fin du IIe millénaire av. J.-C. jusqu'au VIe siècle av. J.-C..

Fouilles
Le site d'Abu Habbah a fait l'objet d'un premier repérage et de plans par W. B. Selby et J. B. Bewsher vers 1860. 
Les fouilles y ont débuté en 1881 sous la direction d'Hormuzd Rassam, qui explora l'espace de dix-huit mois le secteur du temple de Shamash et en dressa les premiers plan, et en rapporta près de soixante mille tablettes et fragments de tablettes, dont beaucoup sont issus de fouilles clandestines. 
En 1894, le site fut fouillé brièvement par le père Jean-Vincent Scheil, qui s'intéressa notamment au secteur des résidences des prêtresse de Shamash. Il fut à nouveau fouillé en 1927 par les Allemands Walter Andrae et Julius Jordan. 
Il fut ensuite exploré par des archéologues irakiens, dans les années 1940 puis à partir de 1978 et jusqu'à la première guerre d'Iraq, sous la direction de Walid al-Jadir, dans les secteurs résidentiels et sacrés (mise au jour d'une bibliothèque en 1985).

Organisation du site
Abu Habbah est un site d'environ 100 hectares, de forme grossièrement rectangulaire, avec pour dimensions environ 1 300 mètres sur 800. Ses limites sur trois côtés sont marquées par des levées de terre d'environ 7 mètres de large, qui ont sans doute servi de digues et ont apparemment recouvert la muraille de la ville, connue notamment parce qu'elles ont été construites (ou restaurées) par Hammurabi. Le site était bordé par un canal joignant le Tigre à l'Euphrate, qui reliait la ville à l'autre Sippar. Il était constitué de deux tells principaux, celui du sud-ouest comprenant le sanctuaire de Shamash, et celui du nord-ouest comprenant des quartiers résidentiels.

L'Ebabbar, temple du Dieu-Soleil
Les édifices
Le cœur de la ville était le temple du dieu-Soleil Shamash, l'Ebabbar, « Demeure Brillante » en sumérien. C'est un édifice ancien, déjà l'un des sanctuaires majeurs de la Mésopotamie dans la seconde moitié du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C., en particulier sous les rois d'Akkad (XXIIIe siècle av. J.-C.). Il fut par la suite restauré régulièrement par les rois babyloniens. Son état tel qu'il a été dégagé lors des fouilles est celui de la période néo-babylonienne (VIe siècle av. J.-C.), étant rénové par les rois Nabopolassar et Nabonide. Il semble avoir cessé d'être en activité au début du Ve siècle av. J.-C., sous les premiers rois Perses achéménides.
Le sanctuaire reprenait alors les éléments caractéristiques des grands temples babyloniens récents. Il était entouré par une enceinte délimitant l'espace sacré (320 × 240 m), et organisé autour d'une grande cour bordée de pièces ayant une fonction administrative. À l'ouest se trouvait le lieu de culte de Shamash, constitué d'un vestibule et d'une cella où se trouvait la statue du dieu. Il était encadré par deux autres lieux de culte, celui de sa parèdre Aya, et celui de son vizir Bunene. Dans une cour située derrière ces temples avait été érigée une ziggourat, de base 37 × 30 mètres, dont les ruines s'élèvent encore à une quinzaine de mètres de hauteur. Son nom cérémoniel était é-kun-an-ku-ga, « Demeure, Seuil du Ciel Pur ».

Les archives
D'importants lots de tablettes ont été dégagés dans le quartier sacré, par des fouilleurs clandestins. Une fois remis vaguement en ordre (l'ampleur de la documentation ne facilitant pas les choses), on a pu repérer plusieurs lots d'archives : celles d'un « cloître » de l'époque paléo-babylonienne (XIXe – XVIIe siècles av. J.-C.) habité par des religieuses consacrées à Shamash, les archives du temple de l'époque néo-babylonienne (VIe siècle av. J.-C.).

Période paléo-babylonienne
Les archives concernent essentiellement la vie administrative et économique du temple. À l'époque paléo-babylonienne, son secteur administratif était dirigé par un personnage appelé šangum, qui était assisté par un intendant (šatammum) et ses deux assistants (šapirum). Le personnel religieux comprenait des « purificateurs » (pašīšum et gudapsûm), plutôt chargés des rites sacrificiels, des chantres (nārum), ainsi que de nombreux prébendiers se partageant à tout de rôle des charges cultuelles. Les devins haruspices (bārûm) attestés dans la documentation de l'époque ne sont pas rattachés au sanctuaire. La catégorie de clergé (au sens large) la mieux connue est celle des prêtresses appelées nāditum, grâce aux importantes archives qu'elles ont laissé. Souvent issues de familles de notables, elles avaient été vouées au dieu Shamash dès leur adolescence, ne devaient pas enfanter et étaient astreintes au célibat. Elles habitaient dans un secteur appelé gāgum, souvent traduit par « cloître », même si elles n'y étaient pas cloîtrées puisqu'elles pouvaient aller et venir librement. Elles y disposaient de résidences, de bâtiments administratifs, de magasins, d'ateliers. Leur rôle économique semble avoir été important, alors qu'elles n'avaient apparemment pas de fonctions cultuelles, puisque leur lien avec le culte semble surtout avoir été de faire des offrandes. Ces religieuses avaient été richement dotées par leur famille, et pouvaient disposer librement de ces biens pour mener leurs affaires de propriétaires terriennes, ou bien de prêteuses et d'investisseur dans le commerce. Elles disposaient donc d'une liberté économique inhabituelle pour des femmes à cette période. De fait, on connaît plusieurs litiges relatifs à leur héritage, qui était très convoité, et devait en principe revenir à leur famille.

Période néo-babylonienne
Les archives de l'époque néo-babylonienne concernent plus le domaine du temple. La provenance exacte des tablettes sur le site n'a pas été systématiquement répertoriée à l'époque de leur dégagement, mais une bonne moitié provient d'une seule pièce localisée dans les bâtiments de la partie sud du sanctuaire. Environ 32 000 tablettes de cette époque ont été cataloguées au British Museum, datées de la période 625-486 av. J.-C., donc l'époque néo-babylonienne et le début de l'époque achéménide. Il s'agit pour l'essentiel de documents administratifs routiniers, à savoir des reçus, comptes, listes, mais on trouve aussi des contrats de prêt, de vente, aussi des lettres et textes scolaires. Une partie des tablettes est de nature privée.
Les textes fournissent des informations sur l'organisation du sanctuaire. Il est alors dirigé par un grand prêtre portant le titre de « Grand frère » (ahu rabū) qui préside le collège (kiništu) des prêtres, le personnel cultuel comprend aussi des exorcistes (āšipu), des chantres (nāru), des bateliers (malāhu, pour les processions), et les divers métiers alimentaires impliqués dans les sacrifices. Le secteur administratif est placé sous la supervision du šangu et d'un assistant appelé qīpu. Il dispose d'environ 7 000 hectares de terres. Les terres à céréales étaient exploitées par un grand nombre de dépendants, les « cultivateurs » (ikkaru), regroupés en équipes chargées de l'exploitation d'une partie du domaine et devant reverser une part de la récolte au temple. Les palmeraies étaient exploitées ou bien par des salariés, ou bien par des prébendiers qui devaient reverser une part de la récolte affectée au culte. Le temple disposait également d'ateliers où travaillaient des artisans spécialisés, devant réaliser les objets destinés au culte.
La bibliothèque d'époque néo-babylonienne est un autre lot de tablette de première importance de cette époque. Elle a été mise au jour lors des fouilles irakiennes des années 1980, dans un angle de la grande cour, dans le secteur nord-ouest du sanctuaire qui semble avoir été destiné à la déesse Aya. Il s'agit d'une chambre de 4,40 × 2,70 mètres dont trois des murs disposaient d'étagères en argile et plâtre comprenant 56 casiers où étaient rangées les tablettes, à la verticale. Une salle plus vaste située avant pourrait avoir servi de lieu d'étude ou de copie. On y a retrouvé de nombreuses tablettes, les plus anciennes datées du XIe siècle av. J.-C., la plupart du VIe siècle av. J.-C., fournissant un échantillon représentatif de la culture des lettrés des temples néo-babyloniens : listes lexicales, textes cultuels (hymnes, prières, rituels), astronomiques/astrologiques, mathématiques, copies de vieilles inscriptions royales, et des mythes (Lugal-e, Atrahasis, Enuma Elish).

Les résidences
Plusieurs résidences ont été mises au jour lors des fouilles irakiennes d'Abu Habbah, datant de l'époque paléo-babylonienne.
Un premier ensemble a été dégagé au chantier U 106, au nord-ouest. Il s'agit de grandes maisons, souvent organisées autour de cour centrales, desservies par des ruelles et une artère principale, suivant une disposition bien connue pour l'urbanisme de cette période. Elles se présentent sur plusieurs niveaux datés d'entre le XIXe siècle av. J.-C. et le XVIIe siècle av. J.-C., sur la foi des tablettes qui y ont été retrouvées, s'étalant des règnes des rois de Sippar jusqu'à celui du babylonien Samsu-iluna.
L'autre secteur résidentiel fouillé, V 108, situé à l'ouest de la ziggurat, présente une disposition plus originale. Il est organisé autour de ruelles étroites disposées de façon parallèle, isolant des sortes d’insulae comprenant de petites unités juxtaposées comprenant une ou deux pièces. Il s'agissait sans doute de logements destinés aux desservants du temple (le « cloître » des nāditum ?).

Références
Bibliographie
Walid al-Jadir, « Sippar : ville du dieu soleil », Dossiers Histoires et Archéologie, no 103 « La Babylonie »,‎ mars 1986, p. 52-54
(en) Hermann Gasche et Caroline Janssen, « Sippar », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 5, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 47-49
Dominique Charpin et Martin Sauvage, « Sippar », dans F. Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, 2001, p. 782-784
(de) « Sippar », dans Reallexikon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. XII, 2009-2011, p. 528-542

Articles connexes
Tell ed-Der
Shamash

 Portail de l’histoire   Portail de l'Antiquité   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’Irak   Portail de la Mésopotamie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SHURUPPAK
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:36:50


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,387
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shuruppak
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shuruppak (Sumerian: 𒋢𒆳𒊒𒆠 ŠuruppagKI, SU.KUR.RUki, "the healing place"), modern Tell Fara, was an ancient Sumerian city situated about 55 kilometres (35 mi) south of Nippur and 30 kilometers north of ancient Uruk on the banks of the Euphrates in Iraq's Al-Qādisiyyah Governorate. Shuruppak was dedicated to Ninlil, also called Sud, the goddess of grain and the air. The Early Dynastic IIIa period is also sometimes called the Fara period. Not to be confused with the Levantine archaeological site Tell el-Far'ah (South).
"Shuruppak" is sometimes also the name of a king of the city, legendary survivor of the Flood, and supposed author of the Instructions of Shuruppak".

History
Jemdet Nasr period
The earliest excavated levels at Shuruppak date to the Jemdet Nasr period about 3000 BC. Several objects made of arsenical copper were found in Shuruppak/Fara dating to the Jemdet Nasr period (c. 2900 BC). Similar objects were also found at Tepe Gawra (levels XII-VIII).

Early Dynastic II
The city rose in importance and size, exceeding 40 hectares(0.4km2), during the Early Dynastic period.
In the Sumerian King List is a ruler, Ubara-Tutu, the last ruler "before the flood". In some versions he is followed by a son, Ziusudra. In later versions of the Epic of Gilgamesh, a man named Utnapishtim, son of Ubara-Tutu, is noted to be king of Shuruppak. This portion of Gilgamesh is thought to have been taken from another literary composition, the Myth of Atrahasis.

Early Dynastic III
The city expanded to its greatest extent at the end of the Early Dynastic III period (2600 BC to 2350 BC) when it covered about 100 hectares.
Cuneiform tablets from the Early Dynastic III period show a thriving, military oriented economy with links to cities throughout the region. It has been proposed that Fara was part of a "hexapolis" with Lagash, Nippur, Uruk, Adab, and Umma, possibly under the leadership of Kish. It has been proposed that in the Early Dynastic IIIa period Shuruppak had passed from the control of Kish to that of Uruk and was part of joint military operations against Kish (with Adab, Nippur, Lagaš, Umma) under the leadership of Uruk.

Akkadian period
In the Akkadian Period (c. 2334–2154 BC), Shuruppak was ruled by a governor holding the title patesi. Like most cities on the Euphrates, it declined during the Akkadian Empire. A clay cone from the Akkadian Empire period found at Shurappak read "Dada, governor of Suruppak: Hala-adda, gover[nor] of Suruppak, his son, laid the ... of the city gate of the goddess Sud".
Governors: Dada; Hala-adda;

Ur III period
During Ur III period (c. 2112-2004 BC), the city was ruled by a governors (ensi2) appointed by Ur. One is known to be Ur-nigar, son of Shulgi, first rulers of Ur III. One of the tablets found at the site is dated by a year name to the beginning of the reign of Shu-Sin, next to last ruler of Ur III. A few governors of Shurappak under the Ur III Empire are known from contemporary epigraphic remains, Ku-Nanna, Lugal-hedu, Ur-nigin-gar, and Ur-Ninkura. In much later literary compositions several purported rulers are mentioned.

Middle Bronze I
In the 2020s BC, the Ur III Empire was hit by a major drought. It is thought to have been abandoned shortly around 2000 BC.
A Isin-Larsa cylinder seal and several pottery plaques which may date to early in the second millennium BC were found at the site. Surface finds are predominantly Early Dynastic. In the 2nd year of Enlil-bani (c. 1860–1837 BC), ruler of Isin, a sage of Nippur is recorded as leaving an herbal medicine at Shurappak.

Flood Myth
The report of the 1930s excavation mentions a layer of flood deposits at the end of the Jemdet Nasr period at Shuruppak. Shuruppak in Mesopotamian legend is one of the "antediluvian" cities and the home of King Utnapishtim, who survives the flood by making a boat beforehand. Schmidt wrote that the flood story of the Bible,seems to be based on a very real event or a series of such, as suggested by the existence at Ur, at Kish, and now at Fara, of inundation deposits, which accumulated on top of human inhabitation. There is finally “the Noah story,” which may possibly symbolize the survival of the Sumerian culture and the end of the Elamite Jemdet Nasr culture. The deposit is like that deposited by river avulsions, a process that was common in the Tigris–Euphrates river system.

Archaeology
Tell Fara extends about a kilometer from north to south. The total area is about 120 hectares, with about 35 hectares of the mound being more than three meters above the surrounding plain, with a maximum of 9 meters. The site consists of two mounds, one larger than the other, separated by an old canal bed as well as a lower town. It was visited by William Loftus in 1850. Hermann Volrath Hilprecht conducted a brief survey in 1900. He found "copper goatheads; a copper, pre-Sargonid sword; a lamp in the shape of a bird; a very archaic seal cylinder; a number of
pre-Sargonid tablets, and 60 incised plates of mother of pearl".
It was first excavated between 1902 and 1903 by Walter Andrae, Robert Koldewey and Friedrich Delitzsch of the German Oriental Society for eight months. They used a new "modern" system which involved excavating trenches 8 feet wide and 5 feet deep every few yards running across the entire width of the larger mound. If a building wall was found in a trench it was further explored. Preliminary identification of the site as Suruppak came from a Ur III period clay nail which mentioned "Haladda, son of Dada, the patesi of Shuruppak (written SU.KUR.RUki)
repaired the ADUS of the Great Gate of the god Shuruppak (written
dSU.KUR.RU-da)". Among other finds, 847 cuneiform tablets and 133 tablet fragments of Early Dynastic III period were collected, which ended up in the Berlin Museum and the Istanbul Museum. They included administrative, legal, lexical, and literary texts. Over 100 of the tablets dealt with the disbursement of rations to workers. About a thousand Early Dynastic clay sealings and fragments (used to secure doors and containers) were also found. Most from cylinder seals but 19 were from stamp seals. In 1903 the site was visited by Edgar James Banks who was excavating at the site of Adab, a four-hour walk to the north. Banks took photographs of the German trenches and noted a 20 foot in diameter well, constructed with plano-convex bricks, in the center of the larger mound as well as an arched sewer, similarly constructed. The latter was where tablets were found. Banks also noted that the smaller mound held a cemetery.

In 1926 it was visited by Raymond P, Dougherty during his archaeological survey of the region. In March and April 1931, a joint team of the American Schools of Oriental Research and the University of Pennsylvania excavated Shuruppak for a further six week season, with Erich Schmidt as director and with epigraphist Samuel Noah Kramer being prompted by reports of illicit excavations in the area. They were able to stratify the major occupation levels as Jemdat Nasr (Fara I), Early Dynastic (Fara II), and Ur III empire (Fara III). There was an "inundation event" between Fara I and Fara II. The excavation recovered 96 tablets and fragments—mostly from pre-Sargonic times—biconvex, and unbaked. The tablets included reference to Shuruppak enabling confirmation of the sites original name.

In 1973, a three-day surface survey of the site was conducted by Harriet P. Martin. Consisting mainly of pottery shard collection, the survey confirmed that Shuruppak dates at least as early as the Jemdet Nasr period, expanded greatly in the Early Dynastic period, and was also an element of the Akkadian Empire and the Third Dynasty of Ur.
A surface survey and a full magnetometer survey of the site was completed was conducted between 2016 and 2018 by a team from the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich led by Adelheid Otto and Berthold Einwag. The initial work was under the regional QADIS survey. A drone was used to create a digital elevation model of the site. The researchers found thousands of robber holes left by looters which had disturbed surface in many places, with the top several meters of the main mound destroyed. They were able to use remains of the 900 meter long trench left by excavators in 1902 and 1903 to orient old excavation documents and aerial mapping with their geomagnetic results. Part of the site was inaccessible because of the spoil heaps from the excavations. A city wall was found (in Area A), which had been missed in the past. A harbor and quay were also found.
Further excavations seasons occurred in 2022 and 2024. Work occurred in an area where the early German excavators found over 1000 seal impressions from about 500 seals (trench Id/Ie), in an area now heavily looted out. The seals covered a wide period, Jemdet Nasr, ED I and ED II so it was assumed the area was a rubbish dump. A location was chosen where sand encroachment had somewhat deterred the robbers. a trench was excavated measuring 4 meters long by 3 meters wide, to a depth of 2.5 meters without reaching virgin soil. A total of 180 clay sealings were found often matching those earlier excavated including an unusually large seal (3.5 centimeters) in the "Elegant Style". Portable X-ray fluorescence (pXRF) analysis of clay sealings suggested that rather than being deposited over a long period of time all of the various seal styles were being used at the same time.

List of rulers
The following list should not be considered complete:

See also
List of cities of the ancient Near East
Instructions of Shuruppak

References
Further reading
Andrae, W., "Aus einem Berichte W. Andrae's über seineExkursion von Fara nach den südbabylonischen Ruinenstätten(TellǏd, Jǒcha und Hamam)", Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft,16, pp. 16–24, 1902 (in German)
Andrae, W., "Die Umgebung von Fara und Abu Hatab (Fara,Bismaja, Abu Hatab, Hˇetime, Dschidr und Juba’i)", Mitteilungen derDeutschen Orient-Gesellschaft,16, pp. 24–30, 1902 (in German)
Andrae, W., "Ausgrabungen in Fara und Abu Hatab. Bericht über dieZeit vom 15. August 1902 bis 10. Januar 1903", Mitteilungen derDeutschen Orient-Gesellschaft,17, pp. 4–35, 1903 (in German)
Cavigneaux, A., "Deux nouveaux contrats de Fāra", in I. Arkhipov – L. Kogan – N. Koslova (eds), The Third Millennium. Studies in Early Mesopotamia and Syria in Honor of Walter Sommerfeld and Manfred Krebernik (Cuneiform Monographs 50), Leiden, pp. 240–258, 2020
Deimel, Anton (1922). Die Inschriften von Fara, Vol. I: Liste der archaischen Keilschriftzeichen (in German). Leipzig: J.C. Hinrichs.
[1] Anton Deimel, "Die Inschriften von Fara, Vol. II: Schultexte aus Fara", Deutsche Orient-Gesellschaft, Berlin, Wissenschaftliche Ver6ffentlichungen, Vol. XLIII, Leipzig, 1923
Anton Deimel, "Die Inschriften von Fara, Vol. III: Wirtschaftstexte aus Fara", Deutsche Orient-Gesellschaft, Berlin. Wissenschaftliche Ver6ffentlichungen, Vol. XLV, Leipzig, 1924
Edzard, D. O., "Fara und Abu Salabih. Die 'Wirtschaftstexte'", ZA 66, pp. 156–195, 1976
Edzard, D. O., "Die Archive von Šuruppag (FĀRA): Umfang und Grenzen der Auswertbarkeit", in E. Lipiñski, State and Temple Economy in the Ancient Near East. Vol. 1. OLA 5, Leuven: Department Oriëntalistiek, pp. 153–169, 1979
Foster, B., "Shuruppak and the Sumerian City State", in L. Kogan, N. Kosolova et al. (eds.), Babel and Bibel 2. Memoriae Igor M. Diakonoff Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, pp. 71–88, 2005
[2] Gori, Fiammetta, "Numeracy in early syro-mesopotamia. A study of accounting practices from Fāra to Ebla", University of Verona Disertation, 2024
Jabbar, Sattar A., "Excavations of German archaeological Expeditions In Al-Qadisiyah Governorate/Iraq (Isin, Tell Fara, Tell Abu Hatab)", Al-Qadisiyah Journal For Humanities Sciences 22.1, pp. 285–301, 2019
R. Jestin, "Tablettes sumériennes de Shuruppak conserves au Musée de Stamboul" Paris, 1937
Jestin, R., "Nouvelles tablettes sumériennes de Suruppak au musée d'Istanbul", Paris, 1957
Koldewey, R., "Acht Briefe Dr. Koldewey's (teilweise im Auszug)(Babylon, Fara und Abu Hatab)", Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft,15, pp. 6–24, 1902 (in German)
Koldewey, R., "Auszug aus fünf Briefen Dr. Koldewey's (Babylon,Fara und Abu Hatab)", Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft,16, pp. 8–15, 1902 (in German)
Krebernik, M., "Die Texte aus Fāra und Tell Abū Ṣalābīḫ", In: J. Bauer, R. K. Englund and M. Krebernik (eds.), Mesopotamien. Späturuk-Zeit und Frühdynastische Zeit. OBO 160/1 (Freiburg–Göttingen), pp. 235−427, 1998
Krebernik, Manfred, "Prä-Fara-zeitliche Texte aus Fara", Babel und Bibel 8: Studies in Sumerian Language and Literature: Festschrift Joachim Krecher, edited by Natalia Koslova, E. Vizirova and Gabor Zólyomi, University Park, USA: Penn State University Press, pp. 327–382, 2014
Lambert, Maurice, "Quatres nouveaux contrats de l’époque de Shuruppak", in: Manfred Lurker (ed.), Beiträge zu Geschichte, Kultur und Religion des Alten Orients, In memoriam Eckhard Unger, Baden-Baden, pp. 27–40, 1971
M. Lambert, "La Periode pr6sargonique, la vie economique a Shuruppak", Sumer 9, pp. 202–205, 1953
H. P. Martin et al., "The Fara Tablets in the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology", Bethesda, MD: CDL Press, 2001 ISBN 1-883053-66-8
Nöldeke, A., "Die Rückkehr unserer Expedition aus Fara", Mitteilun-gen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft,17, pp. 35–44, 1903 (in German)
Pomponio, Francesco, "Notes on the Fara Texts", Orientalia 53.1, pp. 1–18, 1984
Sallaberger, W., "Fara Notes, 1: Administrative lists identified as dub bar and dub gibil", NABU 2022/2, pp. 98–99, 2022
Steinkeller, Piotr, "A Campaign of Southern City-States against Kiš as Documented in the ED IIIa Sources from Šuruppak (Fara)", Journal of Cuneiform Studies 76.1, pp. 3–26, 2024
Steible, H. and Yildiz, F., "Wirtschaftstexte aus Fara II", WVDOG 143, Wiesbaden, 2015
Steible, H. – Yıldız, F., "Kupfer an ein Herdenmat in Šuruppak?", in Ö. Tunca – D. Deheselle (eds), Tablettes et images aux pays de Sumer et Akkad. Mélanges offerts à Monsieur H. Limet, Liège, pp. 149–159, 1996
Steible, H. – Yıldız, F., "Lapislazuli-Zuteilungen an die “Prominenz” von Šuruppak", in S. Graziani (ed.), Studi sul Vicino Oriente Antico dedicati alla memoria di Luigi Cagni, Napoli, pp. 985–1031, 2000
G. Visicato, "The Bureaucracy of Shuruppak : Administrative Centres, Central Offices, Intermediate Structures and Hierarchies in the Economic Documentation of Fara", Münster: Ugarit-Verlag, 1995
Visicato, Giuseppe, "Some Aspects of the Administrative Organization of Fara", Orientalia, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 94–99, 1992
Visicato, G. – Westenholz, A., "A New Fara Contract", SEL 19, pp. 1–4, 2002
Wencel, M. M., "New radiocarbon dates from southern Mesopotamia (Fara and Ur)", Iraq, 80, pp. 251–261, 2018

External links
FARA Regional Survey Project (FARSUP)
E Schmidt 1931 excavtion video at Archive.org
Aramco article on Samuel Kramer
Photographs from the University of Pennsylvania expedition to Fara


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,746
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shuruppak
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shuruppak (écrit aussi Šuruppak ou Curuppag) est une ancienne ville sumérienne située en Mésopotamie, dont la principale phase d'occupation correspond au IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. Le site de la cité se trouve à 175 kilomètres au sud-est de Bagdad, sur le site de Tell Fara. Le site archéologique couvre environ 225 hectares, mais la ville lors de son extension maximale a sans doute couvert au maximum une centaine d'hectares.
La ville de Shuruppak était consacrée à Ninlil, la déesse du blé et de l'air. Le roi sumérien semi-légendaire Uta-Napishtim, parfois considéré comme l'homologue de Noé dans la mythologie mésopotamienne, y aurait vécu. La tradition babylonienne y place aussi son héros Atrahasis, équivalent d'Uta-Napishtim.

Fouilles
Le site de Fara a été repéré par l'explorateur britannique W. K. Loftus en 1850, puis par W. H. Ward en 1885 et l'archéologue allemand H. Hilprecht en 1900. 
Les fouilles régulières sur le site ont débuté en 1902 à l'initiative de la Deutsche Orient-Gesellschaft (DOG) récemment fondée. Celle-ci est dirigée par Robert Koldewey qui opère depuis Babylone et dépêche des missions temporaires sur d'autres site, dont Fara, où se rendent Ernst Heinrich et Walter Andrae. Ces fouilles durent neuf mois, employant environ 200 hommes, chargés de creuser une vingtaine de tranchées, permettant de localiser plusieurs bâtiments identifiés comme des résidences, des maisons organisées autour de cours selon le modèle le plus répandu en Mésopotamie antique. Les résultats des fouilles sont publiés en 1931. 
Le site est à nouveau fouillé en 1931 sous la direction d'Erich Schmidt, pour le compte de l'Université de Pennsylvanie, durant 3 mois. Il explore plusieurs résidences, ainsi que des silos. Les résultats de ces fouilles sont repris par Harriet Martin à partir de 1968, qui conduit également une exploration de surface sur le site afin de repérer les lieux de découverte et de mieux déterminer les phases d'occupation.

Périodes d'occupation
Bien que retenue par la tradition sumérienne comme étant une des villes ayant eu la royauté dans les temps antédiluviens, Shuruppak ne semble pas avoir été une ville ancienne. Le site de Fara s'est surtout développé au IIIe millénaire av. J.-C. Un sondage effectué lors des fouilles de l'Université de Pennsylvanie a permis d'identifier une occupation remontant à l'époque de Djemdet Nasr, v. 3000-2900 av. J.-C. La ville connaît un développement marqué dans les siècles suivants, au début de la période des dynasties archaïques (DA), durant la phase I (v. 2900-2750 av. J.-C.). Durant la phase DA IIIA (v. 2600-2500 av. J.-C.), la ville couvre une centaine d'hectares, ce qui correspond à son extension maximale. C'est par ailleurs la période la plus connue par les sources épigraphiques. Le site est encore occupé durant les époques suivantes, celle d'Akkad (v. 2350-2150 av. J.-C.) et d'Ur III (v. 2120-2004 av. J.-C.) durant lesquelles Shuruppak est une bourgade provinciale, déclinante. Elle est encore occupée à la période d'Isin-Larsa (v. 2004-1750 av. J.-C.), sans doute sur une surface réduite. Le site est abandonné par la suite, et ne semble connaître qu'une occupation ponctuelle au XVIIIe siècle av. J.-C..

Une cité archaïque importante
Si elle n'a pas compté parmi les principales cités sumériennes dans la tradition postérieure, au même titre que Ur, Uruk et Nippur, Shuruppak n'en a pas moins été une cité importante. La Liste royale sumérienne la considère comme une des premières cités à avoir exercé la royauté durant les premiers temps, juste avant le Déluge. C'est un certain Ubara-Tutu qui aurait alors exercé la royauté, et régné quelque 18 600 ans. Son successeur Ziusudra est le personnage principal du récit sumérien du Déluge. Un autre texte littéraire sumérien de premier plan, les Instructions de Shuruppak, se présente comme une collection de conseils de sagesse dispensés par un personnage appelé Shuruppak, comme la ville, présenté comme le fils d'Ubara-tutu et le père de Ziusudra. 
Dans le domaine religieux, Shuruppak est la cité tutélaire de la déesse Sud, qui fut assimilée à la déesse Ninlil, épouse du grand dieu Enlil. On y trouvait son temple, appelé é-dim-gal-an-na (« Maison, grand lien du Ciel »). Des hymnes indiquent par ailleurs que la déesse Inanna/Ishtar disposait d'un temple important dans cette ville, appelé é-nìgin-gar-ra « (Maison, chambre établie »).

Les sources textuelles
Environ 800 tablettes d'argile et 1 300 empreintes de sceaux (servant surtout pour sceller des portes), datant essentiellement de la période DA IIIA (v. 2600-2500 av. J.-C.), ont été mises au jour lors des premières fouilles de Fara et de fouilles clandestines, faisant de ce site l'un des mieux documentés pour cette période reculée. En particulier, la diversité des sources épigraphiques (textes administratifs, privés, scolaires, religieux) est remarquable, témoignant d'une diversification des usages de l'écriture. Les lots de tablettes proviennent de différentes résidences (une vingtaine de lieux de trouvailles), en particulier la « Maison aux tablettes » (tranchée XVh).
Les textes de Shuruppak ne livrent pas d'informations claires sur la situation politique de la ville. Aucun roi local n'est attesté avec certitude dans les archives, et il semblerait que la cité ait été placée dans la mouvance de la principale puissance politique de la partie septentrionale du Sud mésopotamie, Kish ; le « roi » (lugal) mentionné dans les textes pourrait donc être celui de cette cité. F. Pomponio et G. Visicato ont identifié dans les textes et les sceaux de Fara une forme d'organisation politique qu'ils ont qualifié d'« hexapole », une alliance économique et militaire (une sorte d'amphictyonie) impliquant Shuruppak et les autres principales cités sumériennes (Adab, Lagash, Nippur, Umma, Uruk) et sans doute Kish. Cette institution contrôlerait une partie de l'administration de Shuruppak, ou y aurait son administration, et travaillerait en coordination avec les cités partenaires, notamment dans le domaine militaire, puisque les textes font référence à des soldats provenant de plusieurs de ces cités (réunies pour des raisons indéterminées). Ces textes documentent une période limitée dans le temps, trois ans au maximum, et pourraient donc renseigner sur une situation très particulière liée à la domination de Kish sur plusieurs cités de Sumer, gérée depuis Shuruppak. La documentation ne permet cependant pas de confirmer cette hypothèse.
Les lots d'archives les plus importants sont de nature administrative. Ils concernent la gestion de champs (liste de champs, livraison de semence), d'équipes de travailleurs rémunérés par des rations, des offrandes aux temples, enregistrement de mouvements de divers produits (denrées alimentaires, animaux, métaux, bois, etc.). Shuruppak était alors dirigée par un roi, dont le nom n'est pas connu, portant le titre de lugal, qui est peut-être celui de Kish comme vu plus haut, notamment parce que ce titre est plutôt attesté dans cette ville que dans les cités sumériennes. Les dignitaires qui reviennent le plus souvent dans ces documents sont des administrateurs appelés GAR.ensí, dirigés par un personnage appelé GAR.ensí.gal (« Grand GAR.ensí »). Ils s'occupent des « bureaux » administratifs dont les archives ont été mises au jour. Leurs fonctions semblent temporaires, puisque les textes mentionnent des « tours » ou « rotations » (bala) effectuées par ces dignitaires. Les institutions encadrant la société et l'économie, sans doute dans le cadre plus vaste de l'hexapole évoquée plus haut, qui apparaissent dans ces textes sont le Palais (é-gal) et la « Maison de la Ville » (é-uru), cette dernière institution étant une spécificité de Shuruppak pour cette période. À la différence des autres cités sumériennes connues pour la période archaïque, aucun temple n'apparaît dans ces archives en tant qu'institution majeure de la ville. 
Ces institutions encadraient leurs travailleurs, notamment des corvéables, qui étaient organisés en équipes dirigées par des chefs. Cette organisation renvoie du reste à celle de l'armée, qui apparaît dans des documents relatifs à des opérations militaires, puisque les travailleurs comme les soldats sont désignés comme des « corvéables » (guruš). Le royaume de Shuruppak pouvait donc lever des conscrits, mais il disposait apparemment aussi d'une forme d'armée permanente, organisée autour d'un régiment d'environ 700 hommes, divisé en bataillons de 60 ou 100 soldats dirigés par un capitaine (nu-banda), eux-mêmes subdivisés en unités d'une dizaine d'hommes dirigées par des officiers (ugula-nam-10, « chef d'une dizaine »).
On a par ailleurs identifié dans la partie nord du site de Fara, lors des fouilles allemandes, une trentaine de silos à grains d'une capacité moyenne de 100 m3 qui devaient être gérés par les institutions évoquées ci-dessus. Ils apparaissent dans les textes sous le nom de ganum. Plusieurs documents administratifs indiquent que l'orge qui y était stockée était distribuée sous forme de rations aux travailleurs dépendants des institutions, notamment les équipes d’agriculteurs, suivant la pratique habituelle en Mésopotamie antique. On a pu estimer que l'ensemble de ces silos, s'ils étaient remplis complètement, pouvaient contenir de quoi fournir des rations à 20 000 personnes pendants six mois. Il est cependant vraisemblable que ces installations n'aient eu vocation à servir que périodiquement.
La cinquantaine de textes « privés » retrouvée à Shuruppak sont des contrats concernant la vente de champs et de maisons, parfois des esclaves. Il n'est pas clair s'il s'agit de propriétés privées, car il semble que dans bien des cas il s'agisse de sortes de propriétés collectives, indivises. Cette documentation offre en tout cas un aperçu sur l'existence de transactions économiques en dehors du cadre institutionnel.
Les autres documents écrits provenant de Fara sont de nature savante. On trouve d'abord des listes lexicales, caractéristiques du milieu intellectuel mésopotamien, ainsi que des tables numériques servant pour le calcul, des textes de rituels d'exorcisme, et des copies scolaires de textes littéraires.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
(en) Harriet P. Martin, « Fara », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, Volume 2, Oxford et New York, 1997, p. 301-303
(en) Harriet P. Martin, Fara: A Reconstruction of the Ancient City of Shuruppak, Birmingham, 1988
(en) Francesco Pomponio et Giuseppe Visicato, Early Dynastic Administrative Tablets of Šuruppak, Naples, 1994
(en) Giuseppe Visicato, The Bureaucracy of Shuruppak, Münster, 1995
(en) Harriet P. Martin et al., The Fara Tablets in the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, Bethesda, CDL Press, 2001
(de) M. Krebernik, « Die Texte aus Fāra und Tell Abu Ṣalābīḫ », dans J. Bauer, R. K. Englund et M. Krebernik, Mesopotamien: Späturuk-Zeit und Frühdynastische Zeit, 1998, p. 235-427
(en) M. P. Streck et H. Martin, « Šuruppag », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. XIII, Berlin, De Gruyter, 2011-2013, p. 334-346

Liens internes
Période des dynasties archaïques

Liens externes

Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

 Portail de l'Antiquité   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’Irak   Portail de la Mésopotamie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
GIRSU
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:36:58


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,689
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Girsu
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Girsu (Sumerian Ĝirsu; cuneiform ĝir2-suki 𒄈𒋢𒆠; modern day Tello) was one of the principal cities of ancient Sumer, serving as the religious capital of the state of Lagash. Continuously inhabited from around 5000 BC to 1750 BC, Girsu flourished as a major sacred, administrative and intellectual centre during the third millennium BC. The city yielded some of the earliest known examples of cuneiform writing, monumental architecture, and complex urban planning, and is today considered one of the key sites for understanding the emergence of civilisation in Mesopotamia.

Geography and Setting
Girsu lay in southern Mesopotamia, near the modern town of Nasr on the Gharraf River, in Dhi Qar Governorate, Iraq. In antiquity, the city occupied a fertile plain irrigated by canals branching from the Euphrates and Tigris Rivers. The surrounding landscape was rich in wildlife, reeds, and farmland, making it suitable for large-scale irrigation agriculture. Over time, environmental change and shifts in the rivers’ courses turned much of the region into arid landscape.

Historical Overview
Early occupation
Archaeological evidence shows that Girsu was already inhabited in the Ubaid period (ca. 5000 to 4200 BC). A terracotta figurine of ophidian or 'snake-like' form found in 2018 attests to occupation from these earliest times.

Sumerian civilization
By the fourth millennium BC, Sumerian communities had founded some of the first true cities in history, including Uruk, Ur, Nippur, Lagash and Girsu. The Sumerians invented writing, wheel-based transport, and developed early forms of geometry, astronomy, and irrigation engineering. Every Sumerian city was dedicated to a patron deity. Girsu was the home of Ningirsu, the warrior god who subdued chaos and maintained cosmic order. As Ningirsu’s sanctuary, Girsu became a revered pilgrimage destination, comparable in importance to later sacred cities.

Politics and Culture
Girsu formed part of the wider state of Lagash, which flourished during the Early Dynastic period (ca. 2900–2350 BC). While the political capital alternated between cities, Girsu remained the spiritual and ceremonial heart of the state. Prominent rulers such as Ur-Nanshe, Eannatum, Enmetena, and later Gudea commissioned temples, canals, and monumental sculptures to celebrate Ningirsu. These rulers left inscriptions describing military campaigns, boundary treaties, and temple foundations, providing one of the richest historical records from Early Mesopotamia.

Urban Development
At its zenith, Girsu was home to around 20,000 people. The city featured monumental architecture, numerous temples, extensive irrigation canals, warehouses, administrative buildings, residences, and the world’s oldest known bridge. The Sumerians designed complex water-control systems with reservoirs and dams that supported agriculture. Over 100,000 clay tablets have been recovered, revealing an advanced bureaucracy that tracked grain distribution, livestock management, and temple affairs.

Religion and Temples
Ningirsu, often depicted as a lion-headed eagle or Thunderbird, embodied divine power over storms and fertility. His cult dominated religious life in Girsu.

The Old and New Temples of Ningirsu
The Old Temple of Ningirsu stood at the city’s centre for nearly a millennium and was repeatedly rebuilt. Around 2125 BC, the ruler Gudea transferred the main shrine to a new sacred mound and constructed the monumental New Temple of Ningirsu, dedicated to the god as hero and architect of the cosmos. This complex was one of the largest in Mesopotamia and included shrines to Ningirsu and his consort Bau. Nine diorite statues of Gudea depict him as a pious ruler with clasped hands in prayer, emphasising devotion and divine authority.

Iconography and artefacts
Notable finds from Girsu include the Silver Vase of Enmetena (ca. 2350 BC), a limestone mace head carved with the Thunderbird, the Stele of the Vultures (2450–2425 BC), and thousands of administrative cuneiform tablets among the earliest written records in the world.

Architecture and Engineering
Girsu demonstrates remarkable Sumerian engineering. Buildings were primarily made of sun-dried and fired mudbricks, often stamped with royal inscriptions.

The Bridge of Girsu
The city’s most extraordinary engineering achievement is the Bridge of Girsu. Today, these are the remains of the oldest bridge structure in the world, dating to around 2000 BC. Discovered in the 1930s and later reidentified by the British Museum and the State Board of Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH) between 2018 and 2023, it served both as a pedestrian crossing and a hydraulic structure that bears strong similarities to modern hydraulic flumes. Its design likely accelerated the water flow and prevented stagnation.

Economy and Daily Life
The prosperity of Girsu relied on irrigation. Water from the Euphrates and Tigris sustained crops of wheat, barley, onions, lentils, and dates. Livestock, fishing, and reed-boat trade complemented agriculture. Temples acted as both religious and economic centres, employing artisans, scribes, and labourers. Archaeological records reveal a highly organised society that meticulously documented production and labour.

Decline and Later History
Girsu was abandoned around 1750 BC when the Tigris River shifted eastwards, causing severe water shortages. Within decades, its canal network dried up and the city became deserted. However, its sanctity endured – around 330 BC, under Alexander the Great, the main temple was briefly refounded, symbolising a Hellenistic revival of ancient Mesopotamian traditions. Bricks dated to the 4th century BC with a bilingual Greek and Aramaic inscription bearing the name of Adadnadinakhe were found at the shrine, which was dedicated to Heracles and Ningirsu.

Archaeological Exploration
Early excavations
Modern rediscovery began in 1877 when the French diplomat Ernest de Sarzec excavated at Tello on behalf of the Louvre Museum. He uncovered temples, archives, and statues of Gudea, revealing the existence of the forgotten Sumerian civilization. Subsequent French archaeologists – Gaston Cros, Henri de Genouillac, and André Parrot – continued work until 1933.

Modern research
After an eighty-year hiatus, new excavations resumed in 2015 under the supervision of Sébastien Rey and Fatima Yassir Husain. In 2016 the Tello/Girsu Project was transferred to the British Museum. The Girsu Project, a collaboration between the British Museum and the State Board of Antiquities and Heritage, combines fieldwork, digital survey, site conservation and training programs for Iraqi archaeologists.

Recent campaigns at the Mound of the Temple (Tell A) have brought to light major remains of the Temple of Ningirsu built by Gudea in the late third millennium BC. Among the finds were dedicatory tablets and inscribed cones. Archaeologists also uncovered a favissa (ritual pit) containing over 300 fragments of vessels, animal offerings, and cult objects. The assemblage, one of the most complete ritual deposits from Early Dynastic Mesopotamia, offers new insight into the ceremonies of Ningirsu’s temple. Notable items include a bronze duck figurine thought to be linked to Nanshe, and a fragment of an Early Dynastic inscribed calcite vase dedicated to Ningirsu.
Excavations at Tablet Hill (Tell V, also known as Mound of the Palace) revealed a large administrative and archival complex dating to the Akkadian and Ur III periods. More than 200 cuneiform tablets and numerous Akkadian sealings were recovered, documenting the management of labour, taxation, and supply. These records provide new insights into how imperial power was maintained. One sealing of Naram-Sin proclaims: “Naram-Sin, the mighty, god of Akkad, king of the four quarters: Lugal-ushumgal, the scribe, governor, your servant”. These discoveries illuminate the workings of the Akkadian imperial bureaucracy, described by excavators as the original “tools of empire.”

Legacy
Today, Girsu stands as a testament to early urban civilisation. Its inscriptions, statues, and artefacts offer invaluable insight into the religious, economic, and artistic achievements of the Sumerians. Artefacts are preserved in the Iraq Museum (Baghdad), the Louvre (Paris), the British Museum (London), and the Istanbul Archaeological Museums. Modern research continues to redefine Girsu as a cradle of human civilization.

Gallery
Ubaid Period objects (ca. 5000–4200 BC)
Uruk Period objects (4000–3100 BC)
Early Dynastic objects (ca. 2900–2335 BC)
Neo-Sumerian objects (2120–2210 BC)
Hellenistic objects (ca. 330 BC)
Early excavations (1887–1933)
See also
Cities of the ancient Near East
History of Mesopotamia
History of Sumer
List of Mesopotamian dynasties

Notes
Further reading
Barrelet, Marie-Thérèse (1965) ‘Une Construction Enigmatique a Tello’, Iraq, 27 (2), pp. 100–18.
Cros, G. (avec le concours de L. Heuzey et de F. Thureau- Dangin) (1910) Nouvelles fouilles de Tello. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Emelianov, V. (2016) ‘The Identity of Gudea as a Cultural and Historical Problem’, in Kämmerer, T. R., Kõiv, M. and Sazonov, V. (eds.) Kings, Gods and People: Establishing Monarchies in the Ancient World. Münster: Ugarit- Verlag, pp. 63–76.
Crawford, H. (1987) ‘The Construction Inférieure at Tello: A Reassessment’, Iraq, 49, pp. 71–6.
Foster, B. R. (1985) ‘The Sargonic Victory Stele from Telloh’, Iraq, 47, pp. 15–30.
Genouillac, H. de (1934) Fouilles de Telloh I: Époques Présargoniques. Paris: Paul Geuthner.
Genouillac, H. de (1936) Fouilles de Telloh II: Époques d’Ur IIIe Dynastie et de Larsa. Paris: Paul Geuthner.
Heuzey, L. (1900) Une villa royale chaldéenne vers l’an 4000 avant notre ère, d’après les levés et les notes de M. de Sarzec. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Heuzey, L. (1902) Musée national du Louvre. Catalogue des antiquités. chaldéennes: sculpture et gravure à la pointe. Paris: Librairies-imprimeries réunies.
Laurito, R. (2020) ‘Clay sealings from Telloh: new evidence from a 3rd millennium BC "corpus"’, in Pathways through Arslantepe. Essays in Honour of Marcella Frangipane. Rome: Sapienza Università di Roma, pp. 315–27.
Maiocchi, M. and Visicato, G. (2020) Administration at Girsu in Gudea’s Time. Venice: Edizioni Ca’ Foscari—Digital Publishing.
Parrot, A. (1948) Tello: Vingt campagnes de fouilles (1877–1933). Paris: Editions Albin Michel.
Rey, S. (2016) For the Gods of Girsu: City-State Formation in Ancient Sumer. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Rey, S. (2021) ‘Divine Cults in the Sacred Precinct of Girsu’, Near Eastern Archaeology , 84, 130–139.
Rey, S. (2024) The Temple of Ningirsu: The Culture of the Sacred in Mesopotamia. University Park, PA: Eisenbrauns; The British Museum.
Sarzec, E. de and Heuzey, L. (avec le concours de A. Amiaud et de F. Thureau- Dangin) (1912 [1884–1912]) Découvertes en Chaldée, Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Suter, C. E. (2000) Gudea’s Temple Building: The Representation of an Early Mesopotamian Ruler in Text and Image. Groningen: STYX Publications.
Thureau- Dangin, F. (1903) Recueil de tablettes chaldéennes. Paris: Ernest Leroux.
Tsouparopoulou, C. (2024) 'The Early Dynastic “Maison des Fruits” at Tell K in Tello (Ĝirsu)' Bulletin of the American Society of Overseas Research, 391, 191-225. https://doi.org/10.1086/730298.

External links
The world's oldest bridge is being preserved in Iraq
The Iraq Emergency Heritage Management Training Scheme: an update
Excavations at Girsu: video


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 206
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%83%D8%B1%D8%B3%D9%88
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

كرسو (بالمسمارية: 𒄈𒋢𒆠) هي مدينة سومرية تقع على بعد 25 كلم شمال شرق مدينة لكش، وعلى بعد 60 كلم شمال مدينة الناصرية، في محافظة ذي قار، وتسمى حاليا بتل تلو.

التاريخ
بنيت مدينة كرسو خلال فترة العبيد قبل (5300-4800 ق م) وبدأت أولى السلالات فيها قبل حوالي (2900-2335 ق م)، خلال عصر الملك كوديا، خلال عصر سلالة لكش الثانية، والتي أصبحت عاصمة مملكة لكش، وايضاً تعتبر مدينة دينية لمملكة لكش، وهي مدينة ذات قوة سياسية واقتصادية خلال حكم سلالة لكش، وخلال عهد سلالة أور الثالثة أصبحت مدينة مهمة، ولكن بعد سقوط سلالة أور انخفضت اهميتها لفترة، لكنها عادت الى تلك الاهمية بعد 200 سنة.
وفي ديسمبر 2021 عثرت البعثة البريطانيّة العاملة في مدينة كرسو على ألواحٍ طينيةٍ نقشت عليها نصوصٌ مسمارية باللغة السومرية، وأختامٌ أسطوانية تعود لعصر فجر السلالات الأولى الذي بدأ سنة 2800 قبل الميلاد، واستمرّ لمدة ستة قرون متتالية. وأيضاً العثور على أول ناظم للمياه يقع على نهرٍ يشقّ مدينة كرسو، وفوق هذا الناظم أنشئ أيضاً أوّل جسرٍ لعبور المشاة في التاريخ، وكان تقريباً قبل 2400 سنة قبل الميلاد، أي في منتصف الألف الثاني قبل الميلاد.

معرض الصور
مصنوعات بفترة العبيد الرابعة (4700-4200 قبل الميلاد)
القطع الأثرية في فترة أوروك (4000 - 3100)
تحف أثرية في كرسو (الألفية الثالثة قبل الميلاد)


== المراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,456
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Girsu
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Girsu est une ancienne ville du pays de Sumer, dont les ruines se trouvent sur le site archéologique de Tello, situé dans le sud de l'Irak actuel, entre le Tigre et le Shatt el-Haï. Il s'agissait d'une des principales villes du territoire de l'ancien royaume de Lagash.
Le site est de forme ovale, couvrant environ 100 hectares, sur lesquels les fouilleurs ont distingué une vingtaine de tells désignés par des lettres (le « tell A », le « tell K », etc.). C'est la capitale religieuse, résidence du dieu dynastique Ningirsu et probablement aussi la capitale politique pour l'époque qui nous est bien documentée (à partir de la période des dynasties archaïques III, c. 2500 av. J.-C.). 
On a longtemps identifié ce site comme étant la ville de Lagash elle-même, mais Thorkild Jacobsen a démontré que ce n'était pas le cas.

Fouilles
Tello est fouillé à partir de 1877 par Ernest Chocquin de Sarzec, vice-consul de France à Bassorah. Les découvertes encourageantes effectuées lors de sa première campagne lui assurent le soutien du conservateur du musée du Louvre, Léon Heuzey, qui lui prodigue des conseils, de Sarzec n'ayant reçu aucune formation d'archéologue. Les conditions de travail sont difficiles et les campagnes de fouilles sont souvent interrompues, en raison de problèmes logistiques, d'une administration ottomane peu disposée à son égard, des conditions difficiles de l'environnement de Tello (une région de marécages) et par la violence endémique régnant dans la région (révolte des Muntafiq). De Sarzec cesse ses fouilles à Tello en 1900. Épuisé par des problèmes de santé liés en grande partie à ses campagnes de fouilles éprouvantes, il meurt juste après son retour en France sans pouvoir poursuivre son labeur à Tello.

Il est relayé à partir de 1903 par le capitaine Gaston Cros, officier de l’armée française guère plus expérimenté dans les fouilles archéologiques, qui prend la direction des fouilles jusqu’en 1909. Pendant les arrêts des recherches, des fouilleurs clandestins issus des tribus arabes locales exhument des objets et tablettes pour les revendre sur les marchés locaux. Cela, ajouté à la faible expérience qu'ont les fouilleurs de cette période des bâtiments en briques crues, fait que les ruines du site de Tello ont été rapidement dégradées, et sont de ce fait mal connues. C’est avant tout l’impressionnante masse d’objets d’art et de tablettes (plus de 30 000) qui fait de ces fouilles une étape majeure de la redécouverte de la Mésopotamie antique : c'est en les étudiant que François Thureau-Dangin a fait progresser considérablement la connaissance du sumérien. Après une longue interruption, l’abbé Henri de Genouillac fouille le site de 1929 à 1931 avec des méthodes plus académiques, avant d’être relayé par André Parrot pour deux campagnes menées en 1932 et 1933. En tout, Tello a connu vingt campagnes de fouilles, dont les résultats sont souvent difficiles à exploiter en raison de la faible qualité académique des premières fouilles et du fait que nombre des découvertes aient été faites par des fouilleurs clandestins.
Le site de Tello a fait l'objet de nouvelles fouilles clandestines après la seconde guerre du Golfe de 2003. À partir de l'automne 2016, de nouvelles campagnes de fouilles ont été entreprises dans le cadre d'un projet conduit par le British Museum et le Bureau des Antiquités d'Irak, sous la direction de Sébastien Rey, visant à former des archéologues dans ce pays. Les fouilles ont eu lieu sur le tell A dans le secteur du temple de Ningirsu, et autour des ruines d'un pont.

Période d'Obeid
Un sondage effectué sous la direction de H. de Genouillac sur le Tell K, au centre du site, a révélé qu'il était habité depuis la période d'Obeïd (Ve millénaire), puis durant la période d'Uruk suivante (IVe millénaire), pour laquelle n'a cependant été dégagé aucun édifice mais uniquement quelques sépultures avec du matériel, notamment de la céramique.

Période des dynasties archaïques
La période ultérieure, celle des dynasties archaïques (DA), est beaucoup mieux connue tant par l'archéologie que par les textes. Le temple du dieu local, Ningirsu (le « Seigneur de Girsu »), l’É-ninnu, est l'édifice le plus important du site, attesté par l'épigraphie dès l'époque d'Ur-Nanshe et restauré par plusieurs de ses successeurs. Son emplacement est manifestement sur le Tell A du site mais les niveaux de cette époque n'ont pas été fouillés. Le seul édifice à vocation cultuelle qui ait été fouillé pour cette période est la « Construction inférieure » du Tell K, une sorte de petite chapelle remontant peut-être au DA II. Un autre petit bâtiment mis au jour sur le même tell est la « Maison des Fruits », de fonction énigmatique. Les mises au jour d'objets d'art des périodes archaïques sont plus notables que les découvertes architecturales : reliefs perforés à vocation votive, Stèle des vautours d'E-anatum, vase en argent d'En-metena, etc. Les premiers textes historiques importants de l'histoire mésopotamienne remontent à ces périodes : la Stèle des vautours d'E-anatum encore, les cônes d'En-metena et d'Urukagina. Le règne de ce dernier marque la fin de l'ère des dynasties archaïques. De ces années-là datent la plupart des archives administratives documentant la vie économique et sociale du royaume de Lagash, dont environ 2 000 tablettes des archives du temple de Ba'u (voir plus bas).

Période d'Akkad
Les conquêtes de Lugal-zagesi d'Umma et de Sargon d'Akkad marquent la fin de l'indépendance de Lagash, mais Girsu reste la capitale de la région, reléguée au rang de province. Si des tablettes de cette période ont été retrouvées, aucun monument n’a été identifié comme spécifique à celle-ci (les bâtiments plus anciens pouvant être toujours employés). Quelques objets ont été exhumés, notamment un relief perforé au nom d’une fille de Naram-Sin d'Akkad ainsi que des fragments de stèles.

Gudea et la seconde dynastie de Lagash
Après le retour à l'indépendance vers le milieu du XXIIe siècle, le roi Gudea entreprend une série d'importantes constructions, qui sont connues par plus d'une centaine d'inscriptions de longueur variable les commémorant, les découvertes archéologiques étant là encore maigres. Son plus grand chantier est la reconstruction du temple de Ningirsu, dont les ruines n'ont pas été explorées. Ce sont surtout les œuvres d'art laissées par ce roi (statues en diorite, stèles) qui ont assuré sa postérité. Ur-Ningirsu II édifie un bâtiment en briques cuites, composé de deux ensembles, chacun organisé autour d’une grande salle rectangulaire, séparés par un long couloir pavé de briques. Il a d’abord été identifié comme étant un « hypogée » monumental, puis comme un aménagement hydraulique (un réservoir servant à réguler un système de canalisations) et un pont enjambant un canal. L'exploitation de photographies aériennes et de nouvelles recherches sur le terrain ont finalement confirmé la dernière solution ; le pont a fait l'objet d'une restauration.

Troisième dynastie d'Ur
Par la suite, les rois de la troisième dynastie d'Ur restaurent les temples de Girsu. Les nombreuses tablettes administratives retrouvées à Tello datant de cette époque montrent que la région est l'une des plus riches de ce royaume.

Période paléo-babylonienne
Au début du IIe millénaire (période paléo-babylonienne), la cité décline lentement, avant d'être finalement désertée vers le XVIIe siècle, alors qu'elle fait partie du royaume de Babylone (le temple de Ningirsu est encore attesté dans le Code de Hammurabi au milieu du XVIIIe siècle).

Phases récentes
Sans doute occupée de façon limitée durant les siècles suivants, Girsu connaît un renouveau au IIe siècle (durant la période hellénistique), en même temps que tout l'extrême sud de la Mésopotamie. Sur les ruines de l'É-ninnu de Gudea, un petit potentat local du nom d'Adad-nadin-ahhe construit un palais sur le tell A. Il commémore cette construction par des inscriptions en alphabet araméen et en grec. Il cherche à se placer dans la continuité des souverains de l'âge de gloire de Lagash, puisque son palais suit en partie le plan du temple sur lequel il est érigé, et emploie des briques de mêmes dimensions ; de plus, certaines statues de Gudea sont exhumées et placées dans la cour du palais. 
Des sceaux d'époque sassanide sont les traces des occupations les plus récentes sur Tello.

Références
Bibliographie
Martin Sauvage, « Girsu », dans Francis Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, Robert Laffont, coll. « Bouquins », 2001, p. 349-351
André Parrot, Tello : vingt campagnes de fouilles (1877-1933), Paris, Albin Michel, 1948
(de) Su-Kyung Huh, Studien zur Region Lagaš : Von der Ubaid- bis zur altbabylonischen Zeit, Münster, Ugarit-Verlag, 2008
(en) Sébastien Rey, For the Gods of Girsu : City-State Formation in Ancient Sumer, Oxford, Archaeopress Publishing, 2016

Voir aussi
Articles connexes
Lagash
Sumer
Gudea

Liens externes

Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

Cet article est partiellement ou en totalité issu de l'article intitulé « Lagash » (voir la liste des auteurs).
 Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Mésopotamie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
LARSA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:37:07


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,899
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Larsa
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Larsa (Sumerian: 𒌓𒀕𒆠, romanized: UD.UNUGKI, read Larsamki), also referred to as Larancha/Laranchon (Gk. Λαραγχων) by Berossos and connected with the biblical Ellasar, was an important city-state of ancient Sumer, the center of the cult of the sun god Utu with his temple E-babbar. It lies some 25 km (16 mi) southeast of Uruk in Iraq's Dhi Qar Governorate, near the east bank of the Shatt-en-Nil canal at the site of the modern settlement Tell as-Senkereh or Sankarah.
Larsa is thought to be the source of a number of tablets involving Babylonian mathematics, including the Plimpton 322 tablet that contains patterns of Pythagorean triples.

History
Larsa is found (as UD.UNUG) on Proto-cuneiform lexical lists from the Uruk 4 period (late 4th millennium BC). A few Proto-cuneiform tablets were also found there. Three Neolithic clay tokens, from a slightly early period, were also found at Larsa. For most of its history Larsa was primarily a cult site for the god Utu. In the early part of the 2nd millennium BC the First Dynasty of Lagash made it a major power for perhaps two centuries. The last known occupation was in the Hellenistic period.

Early Bronze Age
Early Dynastic IIIB
The historical "Larsa" was already in existence as early as the reign of Early Dynastic ruler Eannatum of Lagash (circa 2500–2400 BC), who annexed it to his empire. In a large victory stele found at Girsu he wrote:

"... E-anatum was very clever indeed and he made up the eyes of two doves with kohl, and adorned their heads with cedar (resin). For the god Utu, master of vegetation, in the E-babbar at Larsa, he had them offered as sacrificial bulls."

A later ruler, Entemena, nephew of Eannatum, is recorded on a foundation cone found at nearby Bad-Tibira as cancelling the debts of the citizens of Larsa "He cancelled [oblig]ations for the citizens of Uruk, Larsa, and Pa-tibira ... He restored (the second) to the god Utu’s control in Larsa ...".

Akkadian period
Larsa is attested in the Akkadian Empire in the Temple Hymns of Enheduanna, daughter of Sargon of Akkad.

"... Your lord is the soaring sunlight, the ruler ... righteous voice. He lights up the horizon, he lights up the zenith of heaven. Utu, lord of the Shining House,has built a home in your holy court, House of Larsa, and has taken his seat upon your throne."

Ur III period
In the Ur III empire period that ended the millennium, its first ruler Ur-Nammu recorded, in a brick inscription found at Larse, rebuilding the E-babbar temple of Utu there.

Middle Bronze Age
The city became a political force during the Isin-Larsa period. After the Third Dynasty of Ur collapsed c. 2004 BC, Ishbi-Erra, an official of the last king of the Third Dynasty of Ur, Ibbi-Sin, relocated to Isin and set up a government which purported to be the successor to the Third Dynasty of Ur. From there, Ishbi-Erra recaptured Ur as well as the cities of Uruk and Lagash, which Larsa was subject to. Subsequent rulers of Isin appointed governors to rule over Larsa; one such governor was an Amorite named Gungunum. He eventually broke with Isin and established an independent dynasty in Larsa. To legitimize his rule and deliver a blow to Isin, Gungunum captured the city of Ur. In his year names he recorded the defeat of the distant Anshan in Elam as well as city-states closer to Larsa such as Malgium. As the region of Larsa was the main center of trade via the Persian Gulf, Isin lost an enormously profitable trade route, as well as a city with much cultic significance.
Gungunum's two successors, Abisare (c. 1905–1894 BC) and Sumuel (c. 1894–1865 BC), both took steps to cut Isin completely off from access to canals. Isin quickly lost political and economic influence.

Larsa grew powerful, but never accumulated a large territory. At its peak under king Rim-Sin I (c. 1822–1763 BC), Larsa controlled about 10–15 other city-states. In the latter half of this period the city of Mashkan-shapir acted as a second capital of the city-state. Nevertheless, huge building projects and agricultural undertakings can be detected archaeologically. After the defeat of Rim-Sin I by Hammurabi of Babylon, Larsa became a minor site, though it has been suggested that it was the home of the First Sealand Dynasty of Babylon.

Iron Age
Larsa was known to be active during the Neo-Babylonian, Achaemenid, and Hellenistic periods based on building brick inscriptions as well as a number of cuneiform texts from the Larsa temple of Samash which were found in Uruk. The E-babbar of Utu/Shamash was destroyed by fire in the 2nd century BC and the area re-used for poorly built private homes. The entire site was abandoned by the 1st century BC.

List of rulers
The following list should not be considered complete:

Archaeology
The remains of Larsa cover an area of about 200 hectares. The highest point is around 70 ft (21 m) in height.
The site of Tell es-Senkereh was first excavated, under the rudimentary archaeological standards of his day, by William Loftus in 1850 for less than a month. Loftus recovered building bricks of Nebuchadnezzar II of the Neo-Babylonian Empire which enabled the site's identification as the ancient city of Larsa. Much of the effort by Loftus was on the temple of Shamash, rebuilt by Nebuchadnezzar II. Inscriptions of Burna-Buriash II of the Kassite dynasty of Babylon and Hammurabi of the First Babylonian dynasty were also found. Larsa was also briefly worked by Walter Andrae in 1903. The site was inspected by Edgar James Banks in 1905. He found that widespread looting by the local population was occurring there.
The first modern, scientific, excavation of Senkereh occurred in 1933, with the work of André Parrot.
Parrot worked at the location again in 1967.
In 1969 and 1970, Larsa was excavated by Jean-Claude Margueron.
Between 1976 and 1991, an expedition of the Delegation Archaeologic Francaise en Irak led by J-L. Huot excavated at Tell es-Senereh for 13 seasons. The primary focus of the excavation was the Neo-Babylonian E-Babbar temple of Utu/Shamash. Floors and wall repairs showed its continued use in the Hellenistic period. A tablet, found on the earliest Hellenistic floor, was dated to the reign of Philip Arrhidaeus (320 BC). Soundings showed that the Neo-Babylonian temple followed that plan of the prior Kassite and earlier temples. Numerous inscriptions and cuneiform tablets were found representing the reigns of numerous rulers, from Ur-Nammu  to Hammurabi all the way up to Nebuchadnezzar II.
In 2019 excavations were resumed. The first season began with a topographic survey, by drone and surface survey, to refine and correct the mapping from early excavations. Excavation was focused on a large construction of the Hellenistic period built north of the E-Babbar temple. The first season included a magnetometer survey. Excavations continued with one month seasons in 2021 and 2022. They have been able to trace a very large system of internal canals and a port area, all linked to the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in Old Babylonian times. In a destroyed level of the Grand Viziers residence 59 cuneiform tablets, fragments and envelopes dated to the time of Gungunum and Abisare were found. Geophysical work continued including on the 10-20 meter wide rampart wall that enclosed Larsa, with six main gates. Magnetic surveys using a caesium gradiometer
have discovered a massive baked brick water gate in the 15 meter wide mud brick wall on the western side. The
gate permitted the passage of one of the large canals that passed through Larsa. A pedestrian gate
was adjacent. Other portions of the 5376 meter long city wall (20 meters wide in places) were also surveyed and work this continues at the site.

See also
Cities of the ancient Near East
Short chronology timeline
Letter from Iddin-Sin to Zinu
Tell Sifr

References
Further reading
[9] Abid, Basima Jalil, and Ahmed Naji Sabee, "The fattening barn in Larsa and its role in providing the cities with offerings (Naptanu) from the reign of the King Rim Sin", ISIN Journal 1, 2021
Arnaud, Daniel, "Catalogue Des Textes Trouvés Au Cours Des Fouilles et Des Explorations Régulières de La Mission Française a Tell Senkereh-Larsa En 1969 et 1970", Syria, vol. 48, no. 3/4, pp. 289–93, 1971
Arnaud, Daniel, Texte aus Larsa. Die epigraphischen Funde der 1. Kampagne in Senkereh-Larsa 1933. Berlin: Reimer, 1994, ISBN 3-496-02510-7.
Birot, Maurice, "Découvertes Épigraphiques a Larsa (Campagnes 1967)", Syria, vol. 45, no. 3/4, pp. 241–47, 1968
Judith K. Bjorkman, "The Larsa Goldsmith's Hoards-New Interpretations", Journal of Near Eastern Studies, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 1993
T. Breckwoldt, "Management of grain storage in Old Babylonian Larsa", Archiv für Orientforschung, no. 42–43, pp. 64–88, 1995–1996
Calvet, Y., et al., "Larsa Rapport Préliminaire Sur La Sixième Campagne de Fouilles", Syria, vol. 53, no. 1/2, pp. 1–45, 1976
Calvet Y., "Un niveau protodynastique à Larsa", Huot J.-L. (ed.), Larsa. Travaux de 1987 et 1989, BAH 165, Beyrouth, pp. 23–28, 2003
Charpin, D. 2018, "En marge d’EcritUr, 1 : un temple funéraire pour la famille royale de Larsa?", Notes Assyriologiques Brèves et Utilitaires 2018, no 1, 2018
Charpin, D., "Enanedu et les prêtresses-enum du dieu Nanna à Ur à l’époque paléo-babylonienne", in D. Charpin, M. Béranger, B. Fiette & A. Jacquet, Nouvelles recherches sur les archives d’Ur d’époque paléo-babylonienne. Mémoires de N.A.B.U. 22, Paris: Société pour l’Étude du Proche-Orient ancien, pp. 187–210, 2020
Feuerherm, Karljürgen G., "Architectural Features of Larsa’s Urban Dwelling B 27", Journal of Near Eastern Studies, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 193–204, 2007
[10] Madeleine Fitzgerald, "The Rulers of Larsa", Yale University Dissertation, 2002
Fitzgerald, M. A., "The ethnic and political identity of the Kudur-mabuk dynasty", CRRAI 48, Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten, pp. 101–110, 2005
Földi, Zsombor J., "Prosopography of Old Babylonian Documents from Larsa: On Seal Inscriptions, the King’s Name and the So-Called "Double Filiation"",  pp. 517-538, 2023
Goetze, Albrecht, "Sin-Iddinam of Larsa. New Tablets from His Reign", Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 83–118, 1950
[11] Ettalene M. Grice, "Records from Ur and Larsa dated in the Larsa Dynasty", Yale University Press, 1919
[12] Ettalene M. Grice, Clarence E. Keiser, Morris Jastrow, "Chronology of the Larsa Dynasty", AMS Press, 1979 ISBN 0-404-60274-6
Huot, J.-L., Rougeulle, A., Suire, J., "La structure urbaine de Larsa, une approche provisoire", in J.-L. Huot (ed.), Larsa, Travaux de 1985, ERC, Paris, pp. 19–52, 1989
Huot, Jean-Louis, et al., "Larsa. Rapport Préliminaire Sur La Huitième Campagne a Larsa et La Deuxième Campagne a Tell El ’Oueili (1978)", Syria, vol. 58, no. 1/2, pp. 7–148, 1981
Kaerki, Ilmari, Die sumerischen und akkadischen Königsinschriften der altbabylonischen Zeit 1. - Isin, Larsa, Uruk, Studia orientalia 49, Helsinki, 1980, ISBN 951-95075-6-6.
W.F. Leemans, "Legal and economic records from the Kingdom of Larsa", Brill, 1954 ISBN 90-6258-120-X
[13] Lutz, Henry Frederick, "Early Babylonian Letters from Larsa", Yale University Press, 1917
Marcel Segrist, "Larsa Year Names", Andrews University Press, 1990 ISBN 0-943872-54-5
Tyborowski, Witold, "Šēp-Sîn, a Private Businessman of the Old Babylonian Larsa", Die Welt Des Orients, vol. 33, pp. 68–88, 2003

External links

- European archaeologists back in Iraq after years of war - Guillaume Decamme - Phys.org - January 12, 2022
The Exceptional Career of a Mesopotamian Ruler without a Crown: Kudur-Mabuk and the Kingship of Larsa - Baptiste Fiette - ASOR
Yearnames of Larsa rulers at CDLI
On-line digital images of Larsa Tablets at CDLI


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,225
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Larsa
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Larsa (ou Larag ou Larak), qui est appelé aujourd'hui Tell Senkerah (en arabe : تل سنكرة, tall sankara) en Irak, était une cité de Mésopotamie, capitale d'un royaume amorrite. Elle est située à quelque 25 km au sud-est des ruines d'Uruk. Larsa est mentionnée dans des inscriptions sumériennes antérieures au règne de Ur-Gur, entre 2700 et 2800 av. J.-C., qui construisit et restaura la ziggourat d'É-babbar, le temple de Shamash. Elle est parfois identifiée à la ville biblique d'Ellasar.

Histoire
Le site de Larsa est occupé à l'époque de Djemdet-Nasr (v. 3000-2900 av. J.-C.), période pour laquelle ont été retrouvés trois sceaux-cachets. L'idéogramme désignant la ville apparaît également dans des impressions de sceaux de cette période mises au jour sur le site de Djemdet-Nasr, aux côtés de ceux d'autres cités majeures du Sud mésopotamien, peut-être une attestation d'une ligue formée par ces cités, dans un but cultuel ou autre.
Avec la destruction par l'Élam de l'Empire d'Ur et la mort de son roi Ibbi-sîn (2009-2004 av. J.-C.), la ville va devenir indépendante. Selon une liste dynastique tardive, la Liste des rois de Larsa, le royaume de Larsa aurait été fondé par un dénommé Naplânum, huit ans avant la proclamation d'indépendance du royaume d'Isin par Ishbi-Erra, soit vers 2025 av. J.-C. Sous le règne de Gungunum (1932–1906 av. J.-C.), cinquième roi de Larsa, le royaume prend de l'envergure : Gungunum guerroie en Élam et, la huitième année de son règne, conquiert Ur puis Dêr, Suse, Lagash et peut-être Uruk. La politique de conquête se poursuit sous son fils Abi-sarê et le successeur de ce dernier, Sumu-El.
En 1834 av. J.-C., Kudur-Mabuk, chef d'une tribu amorrite nomade, profite de la lutte entre Isin et Larsa pour prendre d'assaut cette dernière, qu'il confie à son fils Warad-Sîn. C'est alors une période de paix et de prospérité économique qui s'ouvre pour le royaume. Elle est marquée par une intense politique de construction de temples et de canaux et par un développement culturel important.
En 1809 av. J.-C., Rîm-Sîn, frère et successeur de Warad-Sîn, est confronté à une coalition menée par Sîn-Muballit de Babylone, qu'il parvient à contenir. En 1793 av. J.-C., il conquiert le royaume d'Isin, ennemi de toujours de Larsa. C'est alors l'apogée du royaume, qui ne dure que peu de temps : en 1764, Hammurabi pénètre dans le royaume par le nord, et met le siège devant la capitale secondaire, Mashkan-shapir, qu'il prend, puis la capitale principale, Larsa. Le siège dure six mois et mobilise 40 000 soldats. La ville tombe finalement et ses murailles sont détruites. Après une tentative d'évasion, Rîm-Sîn et ses fils sont emprisonnés à Babylone.

Liste des rois de Larsa
Les dates de règne des rois sont encore aujourd'hui très contestées d'où les nombreuses propositions pour chaque roi que l'on peut trouver.

Naplânum (2025-2005 av. J.-C.)
Emisum (2004-1977 av. J.-C.)
Samium (1976-1942 av. J.-C.)
Zabaia (1941-1933 av. J.-C.)
Gungunum (1932-1906 av. J.-C.)
Abi-sarê (1905-1895 av. J.-C.)
Sumu-El (1894-1866 av. J.-C.)
Nûr-Adad (1865-1850 av. J.-C.)
Sîn-iddinam (1849-1843 av. J.-C.)
Sîn-eribam (1842-1840 av. J.-C.)
Sîn-iqîsham (1840-1835 av. J.-C.)
Silli-Adad (1835-1834 av. J.-C.)
Warad-Sîn (1834-1823 av. J.-C.)
Rîm-Sîn (1822-1763 av. J.-C.)
Rîm-Sîn II (1741-1736 av. J.-C.)

Le site archéologique
Fouilles
Identifié en 1854, le site de Larsa a été fouillé par André Parrot en 1933. La campagne a permis de mettre au jour l'É-babbar, un temple édifié par le roi Sîn-iddinam et consacré au dieu Soleil, Shamash. André Parrot a aussi découvert le vase d'Ishtar. Le palais royal de Nûr-Adad a également été dégagé. Par la suite, plusieurs campagnes de fouilles ont été organisées, d'abord dirigées par Jean-Claude Margueron puis par Jean-Louis Huot. Après trente ans d'interruption, la fouille du site a repris en 2019 sous la direction de Régis Vallet.
Les archives scientifiques des fouilles archéologiques de Larsa sont déposées au Pôle archives de la Maison des Sciences de l’homme Mondes.

Organisation générale du site
Le site de Tell Senkereh couvre environ 190 hectares, et est de forme grossièrement ovoïde, aux rebords irréguliers. Sa topographie a été étudiée précisément lors de la campagne de fouilles de 1989, par des prospections de surface combinées à l'étude de photographies aériennes prises au début des années 1970, qui couvrent le centre et l'est du tell (la partie ouest n'est donc pas bien connue). La position centrale est occupée par le complexe du sanctuaire du dieu Shamash, l'Ebabbar, au nord duquel se trouvait le palais de Nur-Adad. À l'est ont été repérés des quartiers résidentiels (au nord-est), mais aussi un autre qui aurait eu une fonction artisanale (au sud-est). Une colline, le tell du Chameau, se trouve également dans la bordure orientale du site ; il pourrait s'agir d'une forteresse d'époque tardive. Dans la partie ouest du site, des zones de nécropoles ont été repérées et quelques tombes fouillées. La ville intérieure est parcourue par des traînées qui correspondent à des canaux, ou bien à des rues principales, dont une qui court des pieds du tell de l'Ebabbar jusqu'au nord, et devait sans doute traverser le site jusqu'au sud. Le tracé du mur d'enceinte n'a pas été identifié sur place, mais il paraît apparaître sur des photographies aériennes de la partie orientale du site. Cinq portes perçant l'enceinte ont néanmoins été fouillées lors de fouilles : deux (ou trois) ont une forme de portes dites « à tenailles » classique de l'architecture mésopotamienne, et trois (ou deux) autres portes dites « massives », dont l'ouverture est bordées par deux massifs en briques crues (des tours ?).

Notes et références
Annexes
Lien interne
Période d'Isin-Larsa
Adorant de Larsa

Liens externes
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

« Larsa », sur Archéologie.culture.fr - Patrimoine du Proche-Orient
« Direction de la mission archéologique française de Larsa, Irak », sur Maison Archéologie Ethnologie, René Ginouvès. Archives des fouilles françaises de Larsa en ligne.
(fr) Les grandes villes mésopotamiennes : Larsa
(en) « Tell Senkereh (ancient: Larsa) », sur U.S. Department of Defense Legacy Resource Mangement Program (DoDLRMP)
(en) Joanne Farchakh-Bajjaly, « LostTreasures from Iraq », sur Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago. Photos du pillage du site (2002-2004).

Bibliographie
Introductions
Daniel Arnaud, « Larsa A. Philologisch. », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. VI, Berlin, De Gruyter, 1980-1983, p. 496-500
Jean-Claude Margueron et Jean-Louis Huot, « Larsa B. Archäologisch. », dans Reallexicon der Assyriologie und Vorderasiatischen Archäologie, vol. VI, Berlin, De Gruyter, 1980-1983, p. 500-506
(en) Jean-Claude Margueron, « Larsa », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 3, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 331-333.
Dominique Charpin, « Larsa (rois) », dans F. Joannès (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation mésopotamienne, Paris, 2001, p. 466-469.

Résultats des fouilles
Jean-Louis Huot et al., Larsa : travaux de 1987 et 1989, Beyrouth, Presses de l'IFPO, 2003
Jean-Louis Huot, L'E.babbar de Larsa aux IIe et Ier millénaires : fouilles de 1974 à 1985, Beyrouth, Presses de l'IFPO, 2014
Régis Vallet et al., « Preliminary Report on the XIVth and XVth Campaigns at Larsa (2019) », Sumer 66, 2020, p. 133-175

Textes
(en) Douglas Frayne, The Royal inscriptions of Mesopotamia. Early periods, volume 4 : Old Babylonian Period (2003-1595 BC), Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 1990, p. 107-322.

 Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Mésopotamie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ERIDU
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Iraq
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:37:17


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 3,007
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eridu
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Eridu (Sumerian: 𒉣𒆠, romanized: NUN.KI; Sumerian: eridugki; Akkadian: irîtu) was a Sumerian city located at Tell Abu Shahrain (Arabic: تل أبو شهرين), also Abu Shahrein or Tell Abu Shahrayn, an archaeological site in Lower Mesopotamia. It is located in Dhi Qar Governorate, Iraq, near the modern city of Basra. Eridu is traditionally considered the earliest city in southern Mesopotamia based on the Sumerian King List. Located 24 kilometers south-southwest of the ancient site of Ur, Eridu was the southernmost of a conglomeration of Sumerian cities that grew around temples, almost in sight of one another. The city gods of Eridu were Enki and his consort Damkina. Enki, later known as Ea, was considered to have founded the city. His temple was called E-Abzu, as Enki was believed to live in Abzu, an aquifer from which all life was thought to stem. According to Sumerian temple hymns, another name for the temple of Ea/Enki was called Esira (Esirra).

"... The temple is constructed with gold and lapis lazuli, Its foundation on the nether-sea (apsu) is filled in. By the river of Sippar (Euphrates) it stands. O Apsu pure place of propriety, Esira, may thy king stand within thee. ..."
At nearby Ur there was a temple of Ishtar of Eridu (built by Lagash's ruler Ur-Baba) and a sanctuary of Inanna of Eridu (built by Ur III ruler Ur-Nammu). Ur-Nammu also recorded building a temple of Ishtar of Eridu at Ur which is assumed to have been a rebuild.
One of the religious quarters of Babylon, containing the temple called the Esagila as well as the temple of Annunitum, among others, was also named Eridu.

Archaeology
Eridu is located on a natural hill in a basin approximately 15 miles long and 20 feet deep, which is separated from the Euphrates by a sandstone ridge called the Hazem. This basin, the As Sulaybiyat Depression (formerly: Khor en-Nejeif), becomes a seasonal lake (Arabic: Sebkha) during the rainy season from November to April.  During this period, it is filled by the discharge of the Wadi Khanega.  Adjacent to eastern edge of the seasonal lake are the Hammar Marshes.
In the 3rd Millennium BC a canal, Id-edin-Eriduga (NUN)ki "the  canal  of  the  Eridug  plain", connected Eridu to the Euphrates river, which later shifted its course. The path of the canal is marked by several low tells with 2nd Millennium BC surface pottery and later burials.
The site contains 8 mounds:

Mound 1 - Abū Šahrain, 580 meters x 540 meters in area NW to WE, 25 meters in height, Enki Temple,  Ur III Ziggurat (É-u₆-nir) Sacred Area, Early Dynastic plano-convex bricks found, Ubaid Period cemetery
Mound 2 – 350 meters x 350 meters in area, 4.3 meters in height, 1 kilometer N of Abū Šahrain, Early Dynastic Palace, remnants of city wall built with plano-convex bricks
Mound 3 - 300 × 150 meters in area, 2.5 meters high, 2.2 kilometers SSW of Abū Šahrain, Isin-Larsa pottery found
Mound 4 - 600 × 300 meters in area, 2.5 kilometers SW of Abū Šahrain, Kassite pottery found
Mound 5 - 500 × 300 meters in area, 3 meters high, 1.5 kilometers SE of Abū Šahrain, Neo-Babylonian and Achaemenid periods
Mound 6 - 300 × 200 meters in area, 2 meters high, 2.5 kilometers SW of Abū Šahrain
Mound 7 - 400 × 200 meters in area, 1.5 meters high, 3 kilometers E of Abū Šahrai
Mound 8 - Usalla, flat area, 8 kilometers NW of Abū Šahrain, Hajj Mohammed and later Ubaid

The site was initially excavated by John George Taylor, the British Vice-counsel at Basra, in 1855. Among the finds were inscribed bricks enabling the identification of the site as Eridu. Excavation on the main tell next occurred by R. Campbell Thompson from April 10 until May 8 in 1918, and H. R. Hall from April 21 until May 8 in 1919, who also conducted a survey in the area around the tell. An interesting find by Hall was a piece of manufactured blue glass which he dated to c. 2000 BC. The blue color was achieved with cobalt, long before this technique emerged in Egypt.
This lump of glass is currently dated to the twenty-first century BC or even earlier, and is considered as perhaps the earliest such glass object in the world in the History of glass. It was produced during the Akkadian Empire or the early Ur III period.

Excavation there resumed from 1946 to 1949 under Fuad Safar and Seton Lloyd of the Iraqi Directorate General of Antiquities and Heritage. Among the finds were a Ubaid period terracotta boat model, complete with a socket amidship for a mast and hole for stays and rudder, bevel-rimmed bowls, and a "lizard type" figurine like those found in a sounding under the Royal Cemetery of Ur. Soundings in the cemetery showed it to have about 1000 graves, all from the end of the Ubaid period (Temple levels VI and VII). They found a sequence of 17 Ubaid Period superseding temples and an Ubaid Period graveyard with 1000 graves of mud-brick boxes oriented to the southeast. The temple began as a 2 meter by 3 meter mud brick square with a niche. At Level XI it was rebuilt and eventually reached its final tripartite form in Level VI. In Ur III times a 300 square meter platform was constructed as a base for a ziggurat. These archaeological investigations showed that, according to A. Leo Oppenheim, "eventually the entire south lapsed into stagnation, abandoning the political initiative to the rulers of the northern cities", probably as a result of increasing salinity produced by continuous irrigation, and the city was abandoned in 600 BC. In 1990 the site was visited by A. M. T. Moore who found two areas of surface pottery kilns not noted by the earlier excavators.
In October 2014 Franco D’Agostino visited the site in preparation for the coming resumption of excavation, noting a number of inscribed Amar-Sin brick fragments on the surface. In 2019, excavations at Eridu were resumed by a joint Italian, French, and Iraqi effort which included the University of Rome La Sapienza and the University of Strasbourg. Work has included producing new detail topographic and photogrammetric maps and is mainly focused on the Ubaid period cemetery and its associated Ubaid residential area.

Artifacts
In March 2006, Giovanni Pettinato and S. Chiod from Rome's La Sapienza University claimed to have discovered 500 Early Dynastic historical and literary cuneiform tablets on the surface at Eridu "disturbed by an explosion". The tablets were said to be from 2600 to 2100 BC (rulers Eannatum to Amar-Sin) and be part of a library. A team was sent to the site by Iraq's State Board of Antiquities and Heritage which found no tablets, only stamped bricks from Eridu and surrounding sites such as Ur. Nor was there a permit to excavate at the site issued to anyone. At this point Pettinato stated that they had actually found 70 inscribed bricks. This turned out to be stamped bricks used to build the modern Eridu dig-house. The dig-house had been built using bricks from the demolished Leonard Woolley’s  expedition house at Ur (clearly spelled out in the 1981 Iraqi excavation report to avoid confusion to future archaeologists). Most of the bricks
in question were returned to Ur in 1962 for use in restoration efforts.

Architecture
Temple and ziggurat
The urban nucleus of Eridu was Enki's temple, called House of the Aquifer (Cuneiform: 𒂍𒍪𒀊, E₂.ZU.AB; Sumerian: e₂-abzu; Akkadian: bītu apsû), which in later history was called House of the Waters (Cuneiform: 𒂍𒇉, E₂.LAGAB×HAL; Sumerian: e₂-engur; Akkadian: bītu engurru). The name refers to Enki's realm. His consort Ninhursag had a nearby temple at Ubaid.
During the Ur III period Ur-Nammu had a ziggurat built over the remains of previous temples.
Aside from Enmerkar of Uruk (as mentioned in the Aratta epics), several later historical Sumerian kings are said in inscriptions found here to have worked on or renewed the e-abzu temple, including Elili of Ur; Ur-Nammu, Shulgi and Amar-Sin of Ur-III, and Nur-Adad of Larsa.

Lament for Eridu
The fall of early Mesopotamia cities and empires was typically believed to be the result of falling out of favor with the gods. A genre called City Laments developed during the Isin-Larsa period, of which the Lament for Ur is the most famous. These laments had a number of sections (kirugu) of which only fragments have been recovered. The Lament for Eridu describes the fall of that city.

"Its king stayed outside his city as if it were an alien city. He wept bitter tears. Father Enki stayed outside his city as if it were an alien city. He wept bitter tears. For the sake of his harmed city, he wept bitter tears. Its lady, like a flying bird, left her city. The mother of E-maḫ, holy Damgalnuna, left her city. The divine powers of the city of holiest divine powers were overturned. The divine powers of the rites of the greatest divine powers were altered. In Eridug everything was reduced to ruin, was wrought with confusion."

History
Eridu is one of the earliest settlements in the region, founded c. 5400 BC during the early Ubaid period, at that time close to the Persian Gulf near the mouth of the Euphrates, although in modern times it is about 90 miles inland. Excavation has shown that the city was founded on a virgin sand dune site with no previous habitation. According to the excavators, construction of the Ur III ziggurat and associated buildings was preceded by the destruction of preceding construction and its use as leveling fill so no remains from that time were found. At a small mound 1 kilometer north of Eridu two Early Dynastic III palaces were found, with an enclosure wall. The palaces measured 45 meters by 65 meters with 2.6 meter wide walls and were constructed in the standard Early Dynastic period method of plano-convex bricks laid in a herringbone fashion.

With possible breaks in occupation in the Early Dynastic III and Akkadian Empire periods, the city was inhabited until the Neo-Babylonian Empire, though in later times it was primarily a cultic site.

During the Ubaid period the site extended out to an area of about 12 hectares (about 30 acres). Twelve neolithic clay tokens, the precursor to Proto-cuneiform, were found in the Ubaid levels of the site. Eighteen superimposed mudbrick temples at the site underlie the unfinished ziggurat of Amar-Sin (c. 2047–2039 BC). Levels XIX to VI were from the Ubaid period and Levels V to I were dated to the Uruk period. Significant habitation was found from the Uruk period with "non-secular" buildings being found in soundings. Uruk finds included decorative terracotta cones topped with copper, copper nails topped with gold, a pair of basalt stone lion statues, columns several meters in diameter coated with cones and gypsum, and extensive Uruk period pottery. Occupation increased in the Early Dynastic period with a monumental  100 meter by 100 meter palace being constructed. An inscription of Elulu, a ruler of the First Dynasty of Ur (c. 2600 BC), was found at Eridu. On a statue of the Early Dynastic ruler of Lagash named Entemena (c. 2400 BC), it reads, "he built Ab-zupasira for Enki, king of Eridu  ...",

Eridu was active during the Third Dynasty of Ur (22nd to 21st century BC) and royal building activity is known from inscribed bricks notably those of Ur-Nammu from his ziggurat marked "Ur-Nammu, king of Ur, the one who built the temple of the god Enki in Eridu." Three Third Dynasty rulers designated Year Names based on the appointment of an en(tu)-priestess (high priestess) of the temple of Enki in Eridu, the highest religious office in the land at that time. In each the first two cases it was also used as the succeeding Year Name.

Sulgi Year 28 - "Year the szita-priest-who-intercedes-for-Szulgi, the son of Szulgi, the strong man, the king of Ur, the king of the four corners of the universe, was installed as en-priest of Enki in Eridu"
Amar-Sin Year 8 - "Year (Ennune-kiag-Amar-Sin) Ennune-the beloved (of Amar-Sin, was installed as en-priestess of Enki in Eridu)"
Ibbi-Sin Year 11 - "Year the szita-priest who prays piously for Ibbi-Sin was chosen by means of the omens as en-priest of Enki in Eridu"

After the fall of Ur III the site was occupied and active during the Isin-Larsa period  (early 2nd Millennium BC) as evidenced by a Year Name of Nur-Adad, ruler of Larsa "Year the temple of Enki in Eridu was built" and prior texts of Isin rulers Ishbi-Erra and Ishme-Dagan showing control over Eridu. Inscribed construction bricks of Nur-Adad have also been found at Eridu. This continued in the Old Babylonian period with Hammurabi stating in his 33rd Year Name "Year Hammu-rabi the king dug the canal (called) 'Hammu-rabi is abundance to the people', the beloved of An and Enlil, established the everlasting waters of plentifulness for Nippur, Eridu, Ur, Larsa, Uruk and Isin, restored Sumer and Akkad which had been scattered, overthrew in battle the army of Mari and Malgium and caused Mari and its territory and the various cities of Subartu to dwell under his authority in friendship"

In an inscription of Kurigalzu I (c. 1375 BC), a ruler of the Kassite dynasty one of his epitaphs is "[he  one  who  ke]eps  the  sanctuary  in  Eridu  in  order".
An inscription of the Second Sealand Dynastic ruler Simbar-shipak (c. 1021–1004 BCE) mentions a priest of Eridu.
The Neo-Assyrian emperor Sargon II (722–705 BCE) awarded andurāru-status (described as "a periodic reinstatement of goods and persons, alienated because of want, to their original status") to Eridu.
The Neo-Babylonian ruler Nebuchadnezzar II (605–562 BC) built at Eridu as evidenced by inscribed bricks found there.

Mythology
In some, but not all, versions of the Sumerian King List, Eridu is the first of five cities where kingship was received before a flood came over the land. The list mentions two rulers of Eridu from the Early Dynastic period, Alulim and Alalngar.

In Sumerian mythology, Eridu was the home of the Abzu temple of the god Enki, the Sumerian counterpart of the Akkadian god Ea, god of deep waters, wisdom and magic. Like all the Sumerian and Babylonian gods, Enki/Ea began as a local god who, according to the later cosmology, came to share the rule of the cosmos with Anu and Enlil. His kingdom was the sweet waters that lay below earth (Sumerian ab=water; zu=far).
The bright star Canopus was known to the ancient Mesopotamians and represented the city of Eridu in the Three Stars Each Babylonian star catalogues and later around 1100 BC on the MUL.APIN tablets. Canopus was called MUL.NUNKI by the Babylonians, which translates as "star of the city of Eridu". From most southern city of Mesopotamia, Eridu, there is a good view to the south, so that about 6000 years ago due to the precession of the Earth's axis the first rising of the star Canopus in Mesopotamia could be observed only from there at the southern meridian at midnight. In the city of Ur this was the case only 60 years later.
In the flood myth tablet found in Ur, how Eridu and Alulim were chosen by gods as first city and first priest-king is described in more detail. The following is the English translation of the tablet:

Adapa, a man of Eridu, is depicted as an early culture hero. Although earlier tradition, Me-Turan/Tell-Haddad tablet, describes Adapa as postdiluvian ruler of Eridu, in late tradition, Adapa came to be viewed as Alulim’s vizier, and he was considered to have brought civilization to the city as the sage of King Alulim.

The stories of Inanna, goddess of Uruk, describe how she had to go to Eridu in order to receive the gifts of civilization. At first Enki, the god of Eridu, attempted to retrieve these sources of his power but later willingly accepted that Uruk now was the centre of the land.

List of rulers
The following list should not be considered complete:

See also
Abzu
Cities of the Ancient Near East
Eridu Genesis
Lake Hammar
Tepe Gawra

References
Citations
Further reading
Espak, Peeter, "Was Eridu The First City in Sumerian Mythology", Studia in Honorem Tarmo Kulmar. When Gods Spoke: Researches and Reflections on Religious Artefacts, pp. 53–70, 2015
Seton Lloyd, "Ur-al 'Ubaid, 'Uqair and Eridu. An Interpretation of Some Evidence from the Flood-Pit", Iraq, British Institute for the Study of Iraq, vol. 22, Ur in Retrospect. In Memory of Sir C. Leonard Woolley, pp. 23–31, (Spring - Autumn, 1960)
Lloyd, S., "The Oldest City of Sumeria: Establishing the origins of Eridu.", Illustrated London News Sept. 11, pp. 303–5, 1948.
Joan Oates, "Ur and Eridu: the Prehistory", Iraq, vol. 22, pp. 32–50, 1960
Joan Oates, "Ur in Retrospect: In Memory of Sir C. Leonard Woolley", pp. 32–50, 1960
Mahan, Muhammed Seiab. "Topography of Eridu and its defensive fortifications", ISIN Journal 3, pp. 75–94, 2022
Margueron, Jean, "Notes d’archéologie et d’architecture Orientales: 3: Du Nouveau Concernant Le Palais d’Eridu?", Syria, vol. 60, no. 3/4, pp. 225–31, 1983
Quenet, Philippe, and Anne-Caroline Rendu Loisel, "La campagne du printemps 2022 à Eridu, Irak du Sud", Les Chroniques d'ARCHIMEDE 3, pp. 5–8, 2022
Reisman, Daniel, "Ninurta’s Journey to Eridu", Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 24, no. 1/2, pp. 3–10, 1971
Van Buren, E. Douglas, "Discoveries at Eridu", Orientalia, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 123–24, 1949
[13] Yassin, Ali Majeed, "Gully erosion model of the archaeological site of Eridu Ziggurat in the southern plateau of Iraq using RS-GIS technology", Thi Qar Arts Journal 3.41, pp. 1–20, 2023 (in arabic)
"The Ruins of Eridu, 2400 B. C.", Scientific American, vol. 83, no. 20, pp. 308–308, 1900

External links
The Sumerian king list: translation, UK: Oxford
Archaeological Photographs from Eridu, IL, USA: Oriental Institute, University of Chicago
Eridu object held at the British Museum
Inana and Enki, The Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature, Oxford UK, JAB, editor: translation
Iraq launches campaign to secure archaeological sites in Dhi Qar Al-Mashareq 2021-09-24


=== Language ===


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,199
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eridu
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Eridu (en arabe : ʾirīdū, إريدو) est une ancienne ville antique de Mésopotamie, située au Sud du pays de Sumer (actuel Sud de l'Irak). Ses ruines se trouvent sur plusieurs tells dispersés sur une vaste zone, à une vingtaine de kilomètres au sud-ouest d’Ur, le site principal étant Abu Shahrain (en arabe : tall ʾabū šahrayn, تل أبو شهرين).

Histoire
Selon la tradition sumérienne, telle qu'on la trouve dans la liste royale sumérienne, Eridu est la première ville à avoir reçu la royauté, quand celle-ci, selon l’expression de ce texte, « est descendue du Ciel ». Cependant il n'est pas assuré que cette tradition ait des fondements historiques. Aux périodes historiques, cette ville n’a jamais été le siège d’un royaume puissant. Elle est en revanche une ville importante sur le plan religieux, puisque c’est la cité du grand dieu Enki/Ea, où se trouve son grand temple, l'É.ABZU, et de ce fait la ville apparaît souvent dans la littérature sumérienne. Si elle est parfois mentionnée comme un port important, Eridu n’est cependant pas située au bord du golfe Persique aux époques historiques, mais plutôt sur une lagune reliée à la mer.
Comme la plupart des sites de Basse Mésopotamie, Eridu fut abandonné dans le courant des XVIIIe et XVIIe siècles av. J.-C., et ne fut plus le lieu d’une occupation importante par la suite. Des traces d'occupation des époques d'Isin-Larsa, de la dynastie kassite, puis de l'époque néo-babylonienne ont été repérées à la surface de différents tells situés sur le site. Nabuchodonosor II de Babylone y restaura le sanctuaire d'Enki au début du VIe siècle av. J.-C.

Recherches archéologiques
Le site a été prospecté par John George Taylor en 1854 et par Reginald Campbell Thompson en 1918, puis H. R. Hall en 1919. Des fouilles plus complètes ont été effectuées entre 1946 et 1950 par le service des antiquités de l’Irak, sous la direction de Fuad Safar, assisté par S. Lloyd à partir de 1948. Eridu n’a pas livré d’important matériel épigraphique. Les fouilles ont repris sous la direction de l'Université de Strasbourg et l'Université de Rome « La Sapienza » depuis 2018.

C’est autour de la zone sacrée, située au centre du tell, que se sont concentrées les fouilles. Ce secteur était ceint d'une muraille intérieure quadrangulaire de 400 × 300 mètres de côté. On y a repéré 19 niveaux archéologiques, ce qui a permis la constitution d’une longue séquence chronologique importante pour notre connaissance de la protohistoire du sud mésopotamien. Les découvertes se sont essentiellement concentrées dans le secteur du temple d'Eridu, qui présente le plus ancien exemple d'architecture monumentale dans le Sud mésopotamien, remontant aux débuts de l'époque d'Obeid (début du Ve millénaire av. J.-C.). Un sondage réalisé en un point du site (« Hut Sounding ») a permis de préciser la séquence archéologique allant de l'époque d'Obeid jusqu'aux Dynasties archaïques (IIIe millénaire av. J.-C.). Par ailleurs, un cimetière de la fin de l'Obeïd a été exploré au nord-ouest du site par les équipes irakiennes.

J. Oates a identifié sur ce site les principales phases de la période d'Obeid : les niveaux les plus anciens, XIX à XV, correspondent à la période 1 (ou période d'Eridu) ; la période suivante, Obeid 2 ou Hajji Mohammad, va des niveaux XIV à XII ; l'Obeid 3 (ou Obeid à proprement parler), des niveaux XI à VIII ; et l'Obeid 4 (ou Obeid tardif), des niveaux VII à VI.
Sur le tell principal, dans la zone sacrée, a été mise au jour une séquence de quatorze « temples » sur terrasse superposés au cours du temps, témoignant d’une grande continuité sur une période très longue, depuis l'époque d'Obeid jusqu'à la fin de la période d'Uruk, donc d'environ 5000 à 3000 av. J.-C. C’est un des exemples les plus remarquables du développement progressif de l’architecture monumentale en Basse Mésopotamie, en un même lieu, vu comme un signe de la continuité culturelle dans le Sud mésopotamien aux époques protohistoriques. Le « temple » le plus ancien, au niveau XVI, est un petit édifice en briques de forme rectangulaire, avec en son centre un podium ayant pu servir d'autel pour les offrandes et un autre podium situé dans une niche sur son côté nord-ouest. Les constructions suivantes reprennent un plan similaire, mais leur taille va croissante avec le temps, et des salles latérales sont ajoutées sur les deux côtés de la salle initiale, qui conserve son rôle principal, donnant ainsi à l'édifice un plan tripartite. Ses façades sont agrémentées d'un décor à niches et redans typique du Sud mésopotamien. Pour la phase finale de l'Obeid (niveau VI), de grandes quantités de restes de poissons ont été exhumées, sans doute des offrandes alimentaires destinées à la divinité de l'édifice.

La Période d'Uruk est représentée par les niveaux V à I du temple, mais les restes des édifices sont trop érodés pour avoir livré un plan compréhensible. On a en revanche trouvé un bâtiment de la fin de cette période ailleurs sur le tell. Pour le Dynastique archaïque, un palais a été retrouvé au nord du site sur un tell isolé. À la fin du IIIe millénaire av. J.-C, le roi Ur-Nammu d’Ur restaure le temple d'Enki et y adjoint une ziggurat, ayant une base rectangulaire de dimensions 61,80 sur 46,50 mètres. On parvenait à son sommet par trois escaliers, le principal étant perpendiculaire à l'édifice. Le complexe sacré d'Enki, comprenant également le temple du dieu et des dépendances, était entouré d'une enceinte. Sur le tell nord se trouvait à cette même période un édifice palatial, en fait divisé en deux bâtiments, un au nord et un au sud, plus imposant, que pourraient être selon les fouilleurs du site les résidences respectives des grands prêtres de la déesse Damgalnunna et du dieu Enlil.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
(en) Michael D. Danti et Richard L. Zettler, « Eridu », dans Eric M. Meyers (dir.), Oxford Encyclopaedia of Archaeology in the Ancient Near East, vol. 2, Oxford et New York, Oxford University Press, 1997, p. 258-260
(en) Fuad Safar, Mohammad Ali Mustafa et Seton Lloyd, Eridu, Bagdad, State Organizations of Antiquities and Heritage, 1981
(en) Henry T. Wright, « The Southern Margins of Sumer: Archaeological Survey of the Area of Eridu and Ur », dans Robert McCormick Adams, Heartland of Cities, Chicago, The Oriental Institute of Chicago, 1981, p. 295-345 (ISBN 0-253-20914-5)
Philippe Quenet, Ana Ziqquratim : Sur la piste de Babel, Presses universitaires de Strasbourg, 2016, 288 p. (ISBN 978-2-8682-0953-5)
Anne-Caroline Rendu-Loisel et Philippe Quenet, « Nouvelles fouilles à Eridu – Abu Šahrein (Irak du sud) : Aux origines de la civilisation mésopotamienne », Chroniques d’Archimède,‎ 2020, p. 11-14 (lire en ligne)

Annexes
Articles connexes
Assyriologie
Mésopotamie
Sumer
Enki

Liens externes
Antonio Ratti, « Des archéologues ont découvert l’une des plus anciennes villes au monde », National Geographic,‎ 29 avril 2025 (lire en ligne, consulté le 2 mai 2025)

Bases de données et dictionnaires

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative à la bande dessinée : Comic Vine 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

 Portail de la Mésopotamie   Portail du Proche-Orient ancien   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de l’Irak

