

====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
CARTHAGE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:53:04


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 9,154
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carthage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Carthage (Arabic: قرطاج, ) was an ancient city in Northern Africa, on the eastern side of the Lake of Tunis in what is now Tunisia. Carthage was one of the most important trading hubs of the Ancient Mediterranean and one of the most affluent cities of the classical world. It became the capital city of the civilization of Ancient Carthage and later Roman Carthage.
The city developed from a Phoenician colony into the capital of a Punic empire which dominated large parts of the Southwest Mediterranean during the first millennium BC. The legendary Queen Elissa, Alyssa or Dido, originally from Tyre, is regarded as the founder of the city, though her historicity has been questioned. In the myth, Dido asked for land from a local tribe, which told her that she could get as much land as an oxhide could cover. She cut the oxhide into strips and laid out the perimeter of the new city. As Carthage prospered at home, the polity sent colonists abroad as well as magistrates to rule the colonies.
The ancient city was destroyed in the nearly three year siege of Carthage by the Roman Republic during the Third Punic War in 146 BC. It was re-developed a century later as Roman Carthage, which became the major city of the Roman Empire in the province of Africa. The question of Carthaginian decline and demise has remained a subject of literary, political, artistic, and philosophical debates in both ancient and modern histories.
Late antique and medieval Carthage continued to play an important cultural and economic role in the Byzantine period. The city was sacked and destroyed by Umayyad forces after the Battle of Carthage in 698 to prevent it from being reconquered by the Byzantine Empire. It remained occupied during the Muslim period and was used as a fort by the Muslims until the Hafsid period when it was taken by the Crusaders with its inhabitants massacred during the Eighth Crusade. The Hafsids decided to destroy its defenses so it could not be used as a base by a hostile power again. It also continued to function as an episcopal see.
The regional power shifted to Kairouan and the Medina of Tunis in the medieval period, until the early 20th century, when it began to develop into a coastal suburb of Tunis, incorporated as Carthage municipality in 1919. The archaeological site was first surveyed in 1830, by Danish consul Christian Tuxen Falbe. Excavations were performed in the second half of the 19th century by Charles Ernest Beulé and by Alfred Louis Delattre. The Carthage National Museum was founded in 1875 by Cardinal Charles Lavigerie. Excavations performed by French archaeologists in the 1920s first attracted attention because of the evidence they produced for child sacrifice. There has been considerable disagreement among scholars concerning whether child sacrifice was practiced by ancient Carthage. The open-air Carthage Paleo-Christian Museum has exhibits excavated under the auspices of UNESCO from 1975 to 1984. The site of the ruins is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Etymology
The name Carthage ( KAR-thij) is the Early Modern anglicisation of Middle French Carthage /kartaʒə/, from Latin Carthāgō and Karthāgō (cf. Greek Karkhēdōn (Καρχηδών), as well as Karkhadōn (Καρχαδών), and Etruscan *Carθaza) from the Punic qrt-ḥdšt (𐤒𐤓𐤕 𐤇𐤃𐤔𐤕‎) "new city", implying it was a "new Tyre". The Latin adjective pūnicus, meaning "Phoenician", is reflected in English in some borrowings from Latin – notably the Punic Wars and the Punic language.
The Modern Standard Arabic form  (قرطاج) is an adoption of French Carthage, replacing an older local toponym reported as Cartagenna that directly continued the Latin name. It also traces back to the Punic name "Qart-ḥadašt", meaning "new city".

Topography, layout, and society
Overview
Carthage was built on a promontory with sea inlets to the north and the south. The city's location made it master of the Mediterranean's maritime trade. All ships crossing the sea had to pass between Sicily and the coast of Tunisia, where Carthage was built, affording it great power and influence. Two large, artificial harbors were built within the city, one for harboring the city's prodigious navy of 220 warships and the other for mercantile trade. A walled tower overlooked both harbors. The city had massive walls, 37 km (23 mi) long, which was longer than the walls of comparable cities. Most of the walls were on the shore and so could be less impressive, as Carthaginian control of the sea made attack from that direction difficult. The 4.0 to 4.8 km (2.5 to 3 mi) of wall on the isthmus to the west were truly massive and were never penetrated.
Carthage was one of the largest cities of the Hellenistic period and was among the largest cities in preindustrial history. Whereas by AD 14, Rome had at least 750,000 inhabitants and in the following century may have reached 1 million, the cities of Alexandria and Antioch numbered only a few hundred thousand or less. According to the history of Herodian, Carthage rivaled Alexandria for second place in the Roman empire.

Layout
The Punic Carthage was divided into four equally sized residential areas with the same layout. It had religious areas, market places, a council house, towers, a theatre, and a huge necropolis; roughly in the middle of the city stood a high citadel called the Byrsa. Surrounding Carthage were walls "of great strength" said in places to rise above 13 m, being nearly 10 m thick, according to ancient authors. To the west, three parallel walls were built. The walls altogether ran for about 33 kilometres (21 miles) to encircle the city. The heights of the Byrsa were additionally fortified; this area being the last to succumb to the Romans in 146 BC. Originally the Romans had landed their army on the strip of land extending southward from the city.
Outside the city walls of Carthage is the Chora or farm lands of Carthage. Chora encompassed a limited area: the north coastal tell, the lower Bagradas river valley (inland from Utica), Cape Bon, and the adjacent sahel on the east coast. Punic culture here achieved the introduction of agricultural sciences first developed for lands of the eastern Mediterranean, and their adaptation to local African conditions.
The urban landscape of Carthage is known in part from ancient authors, augmented by modern digs and surveys conducted by archeologists. The "first urban nucleus" dating to the seventh century, in area about 10 hectares (25 acres), was apparently located on low-lying lands along the coast (north of the later harbours). As confirmed by archaeological excavations, Carthage was a "creation ex nihilo", built on 'virgin' land, and situated at what was then the end of a peninsula. Here among "mud brick walls and beaten clay floors" (recently uncovered) were also found extensive cemeteries, which yielded evocative grave goods like clay masks. "Thanks to this burial archaeology we know more about archaic Carthage than about any other contemporary city in the western Mediterranean." Already in the eighth century, fabric dyeing operations had been established, evident from crushed shells of murex (from which the 'Phoenician purple' was derived). Nonetheless, only a "meager picture" of the cultural life of the earliest pioneers in the city can be conjectured, and not much about housing, monuments, or defenses. The Roman poet Virgil (70–19 BC) imagined early Carthage, when his legendary character Aeneas had arrived there:

"Aeneas found, where lately huts had been,
marvelous buildings, gateways, cobbled ways,
and din of wagons. There the Tyrians
were hard at work: laying courses for walls,
rolling up stones to build the citadel,
while others picked out building sites and plowed
a boundary furrow. Laws were being enacted,
magistrates and a sacred senate chosen.
Here men were dredging harbors, there they laid
the deep foundations of a theatre,
and quarried massive pillars... ."

The two inner harbors, named cothon in Punic, were located in the southeast; one being commercial, and the other for war. Their definite functions are not entirely known, probably for the construction, outfitting, or repair of ships, perhaps also loading and unloading cargo. Larger anchorages existed to the north and south of the city. North and west of the cothon were located several industrial areas, e.g., metalworking and pottery (e.g., for amphora), which could serve both inner harbors, and ships anchored to the south of the city.
Considering the importance of the Byrsa, the citadel area to the north, our knowledge of it is patchy. Its prominent heights were the scene of fierce combat during the fiery destruction of the city in 146 BC. The Byrsa was the reported site of the Temple of Eshmun (the healing god), at the top of a stairway of sixty steps. A temple of Tanit (the city's queen goddess) was likely situated on the slope of the 'lesser Byrsa' immediately to the east, which runs down toward the sea. Also situated on the Byrsa were luxury homes.
South of the citadel, near the cothon was the tophet, a special and very old cemetery, which when begun lay outside the city's boundaries. Here the Salammbô was located, the Sanctuary of Tanit, not a temple but an enclosure for placing stone stelae. These were mostly short and upright, carved for funeral purposes. The presence of infant skeletons from here may indicate the occurrence of child sacrifice, as claimed in the Bible and Greco-Roman sources, although there has been considerable doubt among archeologists as to this interpretation and many consider it simply a cemetery devoted to infants. Probably the tophet burial fields were "dedicated at an early date, perhaps by the first settlers." Recent studies, on the other hand, indicate that child sacrifice was practiced by the Carthaginians.  According to K.L. Noll, many scholars believe that child sacrifice took place in Carthage.
Between the sea-filled cothon for shipping and the Byrsa heights lay the agora [Greek: "market"], the city-state's central marketplace for business and commerce. The agora was also an area of public squares and plazas, where the people might formally assemble, or gather for festivals. It was the site of religious shrines, and the location of whatever were the major municipal buildings of Carthage. Here beat the heart of civic life. In this district of Carthage, more probably, the ruling suffets presided, the council of elders convened, the tribunal of the 104 met, and justice was dispensed at trials in the open air.
Early residential districts wrapped around the Byrsa from the south to the north east. Houses usually were whitewashed and blank to the street, but within were courtyards open to the sky. In these neighborhoods multistory construction later became common, some up to six stories tall according to an ancient Greek author. Several architectural floorplans of homes have been revealed by recent excavations, as well as the general layout of several city blocks. Stone stairs were set in the streets, and drainage was planned, e.g., in the form of soakaways leaching into the sandy soil. Along the Byrsa's southern slope were located not only fine old homes, but also many of the earliest grave-sites, juxtaposed in small areas, interspersed with daily life.
Artisan workshops were located in the city at sites north and west of the harbours. The location of three metal workshops (implied from iron slag and other vestiges of such activity) were found adjacent to the naval and commercial harbours, and another two were further up the hill toward the Byrsa citadel. Sites of pottery kilns have been identified, between the agora and the harbours, and further north. Earthenware often used Greek models. A fuller's shop for preparing woolen cloth (shrink and thicken) was evidently situated further to the west and south, then by the edge of the city. Carthage also produced objects of rare refinement. During the 4th and 3rd centuries, the sculptures of the sarcophagi became works of art. "Bronze engraving and stone-carving reached their zenith."
The elevation of the land at the promontory on the seashore to the north-east (now called Sidi Bou Saïd), was twice as high above sea level as that at the Byrsa (100 m and 50 m). In between runs a ridge, several times reaching 50 m; it continues northwestward along the seashore, and forms the edge of a plateau-like area between the Byrsa and the sea. Newer urban developments lay here in these northern districts.

Due to the Roman's leveling of the city, the original Punic urban landscape of Carthage was largely lost. Since 1982, French archaeologist Serge Lancel excavated a residential area of the Punic Carthage on top of Byrsa hill near the Forum of the Roman Carthage. The neighborhood can be dated back to early second century BC, and with its houses, shops, and private spaces, is significant for what it reveals about daily life of the Punic Carthage.
The remains have been preserved under embankments, the substructures of the later Roman forum, whose foundation piles dot the district. The housing blocks are separated by a grid of straight streets about 6 m (20 ft) wide, with a roadway consisting of clay; in situ stairs compensate for the slope of the hill. Construction of this type presupposes organization and political will, and has inspired the name of the neighborhood, "Hannibal district", referring to the legendary Punic general or sufet (consul) at the beginning of the second century BC. The habitat is typical, even stereotypical. The street was often used as a storefront/shopfront; cisterns were installed in basements to collect water for domestic use, and a long corridor on the right side of each residence led to a courtyard containing a sump, around which various other elements may be found. In some places, the ground is covered with mosaics called punica pavement, sometimes using a characteristic red mortar.

Society and local economy
Punic culture and agricultural sciences, after arriving at Carthage from the eastern Mediterranean, gradually adapted to the local conditions. The merchant harbor at Carthage was developed after settlement of the nearby Punic town of Utica, and eventually the surrounding African countryside was brought into the orbit of the Punic urban centers, first commercially, then politically. Direct management over cultivation of neighbouring lands by Punic owners followed. A 28-volume work on agriculture written in Punic by Mago, a retired army general (c. 300), was translated into Latin and later into Greek. The original and both translations have been lost; however, some of Mago's text has survived in other Latin works. Olive trees (e.g., grafting), fruit trees (pomegranate, almond, fig, date palm), viniculture, bees, cattle, sheep, poultry, implements, and farm management were among the ancient topics which Mago discussed. As well, Mago addresses the wine-maker's art (here a type of sherry).
In Punic farming society, according to Mago, the small estate owners were the chief producers. They were, two modern historians write, not absent landlords. Rather, the likely reader of Mago was "the master of a relatively modest estate, from which, by great personal exertion, he extracted the maximum yield." Mago counselled the rural landowner, for the sake of their own 'utilitarian' interests, to treat carefully and well their managers and farm workers, or their overseers and slaves. Yet elsewhere these writers suggest that rural land ownership provided also a new power base among the city's nobility, for those resident in their country villas. By many, farming was viewed as an alternative endeavour to an urban business. Another modern historian opines that more often it was the urban merchant of Carthage who owned rural farming land to some profit, and also to retire there during the heat of summer. It may seem that Mago anticipated such an opinion, and instead issued this contrary advice (as quoted by the Roman writer Columella):

The man who acquires an estate must sell his house, lest he prefer to live in the town rather than in the country. Anyone who prefers to live in a town has no need of an estate in the country." "One who has bought land should sell his town house, so that he will have no desire to worship the household gods of the city rather than those of the country; the man who takes greater delight in his city residence will have no need of a country estate.
The issues involved in rural land management also reveal underlying features of Punic society, its structure and stratification. The hired workers might be considered 'rural proletariat', drawn from the local Berbers. Whether there remained Berber landowners next to Punic-run farms is unclear. Some Berbers became sharecroppers. Slaves acquired for farm work were often prisoners of war. In lands outside Punic political control, independent Berbers cultivated grain and raised horses on their lands. Yet within the Punic domain that surrounded the city-state of Carthage, there were ethnic divisions in addition to the usual quasi feudal distinctions between lord and peasant, or master and serf. This inherent instability in the countryside drew the unwanted attention of potential invaders. Yet for long periods Carthage was able to manage these social difficulties.
The many amphorae with Punic markings subsequently found about ancient Mediterranean coastal settlements testify to Carthaginian trade in locally made olive oil and wine. Carthage's agricultural production was held in high regard by the ancients, and rivaled that of Rome – they were once competitors, e.g., over their olive harvests. Under Roman rule, however, grain production (wheat and barley) for export increased dramatically in 'Africa'; yet these later fell with the rise in Roman Egypt's grain exports. Thereafter olive groves and vineyards were re-established around Carthage. Visitors to the several growing regions that surrounded the city wrote admiringly of the lush green gardens, orchards, fields, irrigation channels, hedgerows (as boundaries), as well as the many prosperous farming towns located across the rural landscape.
Accordingly, the Greek author and compiler Diodorus Siculus (fl. 1st century BC), who enjoyed access to ancient writings later lost, and on which he based most of his writings, described agricultural land near the city of Carthage c. 310 BC:

It was divided into market gardens and orchards of all sorts of fruit trees, with many streams of water flowing in channels irrigating every part. There were country homes everywhere, lavishly built and covered with stucco. ... Part of the land was planted with vines, part with olives and other productive trees. Beyond these, cattle and sheep were pastured on the plains, and there were meadows with grazing horses.

Ancient history
Greek cities contested with Carthage for the Western Mediterranean culminating in the Sicilian Wars and the Pyrrhic War over Sicily, while the Romans fought three wars against Carthage, known as the Punic Wars, from the Latin "Punicus" meaning "Phoenician", as Carthage was a Phoenician colony grown into an empire.

Punic Republic
The Carthaginian republic was one of the longest-lived and largest states in the ancient Mediterranean. Reports relay several wars with Syracuse and finally, Rome, which eventually resulted in the defeat and destruction of Carthage in the Third Punic War. The Carthaginians were Phoenician settlers of primarily Southern Mediterranean and Southern European ancestry. Phoenicians had originated in the Mediterranean coast of the Levant. They spoke Canaanite, a Semitic language, and followed a local variety of the ancient Canaanite religion, the Punic religion. The Carthaginians travelled widely across the seas and set up numerous colonies. Unlike Greek, Phoenician, and Tyrian colonizers who "only required colonies to pay due respect for their home-cities", Carthage is said to have "sent its own magistrates to govern overseas settlements".

The fall of Carthage came at the end of the Third Punic War in 146 BC at the Battle of Carthage. Despite initial devastating Roman naval losses and Hannibal's 15-year occupation of much of Roman Italy, who was on the brink of defeat but managed to recover, the end of the series of wars resulted in the end of Carthaginian power and the complete destruction of the city by Scipio Aemilianus. The Romans pulled the Phoenician warships out into the harbor and burned them before the city, and went from house to house, capturing and enslaving the people. About 50,000 Carthaginians were sold into slavery. The city was set ablaze and razed to the ground, leaving only ruins and rubble. After the fall of Carthage, Rome annexed the majority of the Carthaginian colonies, including other North African locations such as Volubilis, Lixus, and Chellah. Today a "Carthaginian peace" can refer to any brutal peace treaty demanding total subjugation of the defeated side.

Salting legend
Since at least 1863, it has been claimed that Carthage was sown with salt after being razed, but there is no evidence for this.

Roman Carthage
When Carthage fell, its nearby rival Utica, a Roman ally, was made capital of the region and replaced Carthage as the leading center of Punic trade and leadership. It had the advantageous position of being situated on the outlet of the Medjerda River, Tunisia's only river that flowed all year long. However, grain cultivation in the Tunisian mountains caused large amounts of silt to erode into the river. This silt accumulated in the harbor until it became useless, and Rome was forced to rebuild Carthage.
By 122 BC, Gaius Gracchus founded a short-lived colony, called Colonia Iunonia, after the Latin name for the Punic goddess Tanit, Iuno Caelestis. The purpose was to obtain arable lands for impoverished farmers. The Senate abolished the colony some time later, to undermine Gracchus' power.
After this ill-fated effort, a new city of Carthage was built on the same land by Julius Caesar in the period from 49 to 44 BC, and by the first century, it had grown to be the second-largest city in the western half of the Roman Empire, with a peak population of 500,000. It was the center of the province of Africa, which was a major breadbasket of the Empire. Among its major monuments was an amphitheater.
Carthage also became a center of early Christianity (see Carthage (episcopal see)). In the first of a string of rather poorly reported councils at Carthage a few years later, no fewer than 70 bishops attended. Tertullian later broke with the mainstream that was increasingly represented in the West by the primacy of the Bishop of Rome, but a more serious rift among Christians was the Donatist controversy, against which Augustine of Hippo spent much time and parchment arguing. At the Council of Carthage (397), the biblical canon for the western Church was confirmed. The Christians at Carthage conducted persecutions against the pagans, during which the pagan temples, notably the famous Temple of Juno Caelesti, were destroyed.

The Vandals under Gaiseric invaded Africa in 429. They relinquished the facade of their allied status to Rome and defeated the Roman general Bonifacius to seize Carthage, the once most treasured province of Rome. The 5th-century Roman bishop Victor Vitensis mentions in his Historia Persecutionis Africanae Provincia that the Vandals destroyed parts of Carthage, including various buildings and churches. Once the Vandals were in power, the ecclesiastical authorities were persecuted, the locals were aggressively taxed, and naval raids were routinely launched on Romans in the Mediterranean.
After a failed attempt to recapture the city in the fifth century, the Eastern Roman Empire finally subdued the Vandals in the Vandalic War in 533–534 and made Carthage capital of Byzantine North Africa. Thereafter, the city became the seat of the praetorian prefecture of Africa, which was made into an exarchate during the emperor Maurice's reign, as was Ravenna on the Italian Peninsula. These two exarchates were the western bulwarks of the Byzantine Empire, all that remained of its power in the West. In the early seventh century Heraclius the Elder, the exarch of Carthage, overthrew the Byzantine emperor Phocas, whereupon his son Heraclius succeeded to the imperial throne.

Islamic period
The Roman Exarchate of Africa was not able to withstand the seventh-century Muslim conquest of the Maghreb. The Umayyad Caliphate under Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan in 686 sent a force led by Zuhayr ibn Qays, who won a battle over the Romans and Berbers led by King Kusaila of the Kingdom of Altava on the plain of Kairouan, but he could not follow that up. In 695, Hassan ibn al-Nu'man captured Carthage and advanced into the Atlas Mountains. An imperial fleet arrived and retook Carthage, but in 698, Hasan ibn al-Nu'man returned and defeated Emperor Tiberios III at the 698 Battle of Carthage. Roman imperial forces withdrew from all of Africa except Ceuta. Fearing that the Byzantine Empire might reconquer it, they decided to destroy Roman Carthage in a scorched earth policy and establish their headquarters somewhere else. Its walls were torn down, the water supply from its aqueducts cut off, the agricultural land was ravaged and its harbors made unusable.
The destruction of the Exarchate of Africa marked a permanent end to the Byzantine Empire's influence in the region.
It is clear from archaeological evidence that the town of Carthage continued to be occupied, as did the neighborhood of Bjordi Djedid. The Baths of Antoninus continued to function in the Arab period and the eleventh-century historian Al-Bakri stated that they were still in good condition at that time. They also had production centers nearby. It is difficult to determine whether the continued habitation of some other buildings belonged to Late Byzantine or Early Arab period. The Bir Ftouha church may have continued to remain in use although it is not clear when it became uninhabited. Constantine the African was born in Carthage.
The Medina of Tunis, originally a Berber settlement, was established as the new regional center under the Umayyad Caliphate in the early 8th century. Under the Aghlabids, the people of Tunis revolted numerous times, but the city profited from economic improvements and quickly became the second most important in the kingdom. It was briefly the national capital, from the end of the reign of Ibrahim II in 902, until 909, when the Shi'ite Berbers took over Ifriqiya and founded the Fatimid Caliphate.
Carthage remained a residential see until the high medieval period, and is mentioned in two letters of Pope Leo IX dated 1053, written in reply to consultations regarding a conflict between the bishops of Carthage and Gummi. In each of the two letters, Pope Leo declares that, after the Bishop of Rome, the first archbishop and chief metropolitan of the whole of Africa is the bishop of Carthage. Later, an archbishop of Carthage named Cyriacus was imprisoned by the Arab rulers because of an accusation by some Christians. Pope Gregory VII wrote Cyriacus a letter of consolation, repeating the hopeful assurances of the primacy of the Church of Carthage, "whether the Church of Carthage should still lie desolate or rise again in glory". By 1076, Cyriacus was set free, but there was only one other bishop in the province. These are the last of whom there is mention in that period of the history of the see.
The fortress of Carthage was used by the Muslims until Hafsid era and was captured by the Crusaders during the Eighth Crusade. The inhabitants of Carthage were slaughtered by the Crusaders after they took it, and it was used as a base of operations against the Hafsids. After repelling them, Muhammad I al-Mustansir decided to raze Cathage's defenses in order to prevent a repeat.

Modern history
Carthage is some 15 kilometres (9.3 miles) east-northeast of Tunis; the settlements nearest to Carthage were the town of Sidi Bou Said to the north and the village of Le Kram to the south. Sidi Bou Said was a village which had grown around the tomb of the eponymous sufi saint (d. 1231), which had been developed into a town under Ottoman rule in the 18th century. Le Kram was developed in the late 19th century under French administration as a settlement close to the port of La Goulette.
In 1881, Tunisia became a French protectorate, and in the same year Charles Lavigerie, who was archbishop of Algiers, became apostolic administrator of the vicariate of Tunis. In the following year, Lavigerie became a cardinal. He "saw himself as the reviver of the ancient Christian Church of Africa, the Church of Cyprian of Carthage", and, on 10 November 1884, was successful in his great ambition of having the metropolitan see of Carthage restored, with himself as its first archbishop. In line with the declaration of Pope Leo IX in 1053, Pope Leo XIII acknowledged the revived Archdiocese of Carthage as the primatial see of Africa and Lavigerie as primate.
The Acropolium of Carthage (Saint Louis Cathedral of Carthage) was erected on Byrsa hill in 1884.

Archaeological sites
The Danish consul Christian Tuxen Falbe conducted a first survey of the topography of the archaeological site (published in 1833).
Antiquarian interest was intensified following the publication of Flaubert's Salammbô in 1858. Charles Ernest Beulé performed some preliminary excavations of Roman remains on Byrsa hill in 1860. In 1866, Muhammad Khaznadar, the son of the Prime Minister of Tunisia, carried out the first locally led excavations. A more systematic survey of both Punic and Roman-era remains is due to Alfred Louis Delattre, who was sent to Tunis by cardinal Charles Lavigerie in 1875 on both an apostolic and an archaeological mission.
Audollent cites Delattre and Lavigerie to the effect that in the 1880s, locals still knew the area of the ancient city under the name of Cartagenna (i.e. reflecting the Latin n-stem Carthāgine).
Auguste Audollent divided the area of Roman Carthage into four quarters, Cartagenna, Dermèche, Byrsa and La Malga. Cartagenna and Dermèche correspond with the lower city, including the site of Punic Carthage; Byrsa is associated with the upper city, which in Punic times was a walled citadel above the harbour; and La Malga is linked with the more remote parts of the upper city in Roman times.
French-led excavations at Carthage began in 1921, and from 1923 reported finds of a large quantity of urns containing a mixture of animal and children's bones. René Dussaud identified a 4th-century BC stela found in Carthage as depicting a child sacrifice.
A temple at Amman (1400–1250 BC) excavated and reported upon by J.B. Hennessy in 1966, shows the possibility of bestial and human sacrifice by fire. While evidence of child sacrifice in Canaan was the object of academic disagreement, with some scholars arguing that merely children's cemeteries had been unearthed in Carthage, the mixture of children's with animal bones as well as associated epigraphic evidence involving mention of mlk led some to believe that, at least in Carthage, child sacrifice was indeed common practice. However, though the animals were surely sacrificed, this does not entirely indicate that the infants were, and in fact the bones indicate the opposite. Rather, the animal sacrifice was likely done to, in some way, honour the deceased.
A study conducted in 1970 by M. Chabeuf, the then Doctor of Science from the University of Paris, showed little difference between 17 modern Tunisians, and 68 Punic remains. An analysis the following year on 42 North-West African skulls dating back to Roman times concluded that they were overall similar to modern Berbers and other Mediterranean populations, especially eastern Iberians. They also noted the presence of one outlier in Tunisia who appears to have inherited mechtoid traits, which led them to hypothesize the persistence of such affinities well into the Punic and Roman era.
M. C. Chamla and D Ferembach (1988) in their entry dealing with the craniometric conclusions of Protohistorical Algerians and Punics in the region of Tunisia, found strong sexual dimorphism with male skulls being robust. Mediterranean elements were dominant, but Mechtoid features, as well as 'Negroid' traits were present in some of the samples. Overall, Punic burials showed affinities with Algerians, Roman Era skulls from Tarragona (Spain), Guanches, and to a lesser extent Abydos (XVIIIth dynasty), Etruscans, Bronze Age Syrians (Euphrates) and skulls from Lozere (France). The anthropological position of the Algerian and Punic people when it comes to populations of the Mediterranean Basin agreed quite well with the geographical situation.
Jehan Desanges stated that "In the Punic burial grounds, negroid remains were not rare and there were black auxiliaries in the Carthaginian army who were certainly not Nilotics".
In 1990, Shomarka Keita, a biological anthropologist, had conducted a craniometric study which featured a set of remains from Northern Africa. He examined a sample of 49 Maghreban crania which included skulls from pre-Roman Carthage and concluded that, although they were heterogeneous, many of them showed physical similarities to crania from equatorial Africa, ancient Egypt, and Kush; with most having traits conforming to the northern (Lower) Egyptian pattern. S.O.Y. Keita's later report in 2018, found the pre-Roman Carthaginian series to be intermediate between the Phoenician and Maghreban. He noted the findings are consistent with an interpretation that it reflects both local and Levantine ancestry due to specific interactions in the ancient period.
Joel. D. Irish, when measuring for dental affinities in 2001, found strong similarities and very small distances between the Canary Islanders and Punic Carthaginians (who originated in West Asia), suggesting a particularly close affinity, despite the geographic distance between these two populations. This result according to Irish, may reflect Berber/Carthaginian admixture. Overall, the findings discovered that "the Canary Island sample is most similar to the four samples from Northwest Africa: the Shawia Berbers, Kabyle Berbers, Bedouin Arabs and Carthaginians, less similar to the three Egyptian samples and least like the three Nubian samples."
In 2016, an ancient Carthaginian individual, who was excavated from a Punic tomb in Byrsa Hill, was found to belong to the rare U5b2c1 maternal haplogroup. The Young Man of Byrsa specimen dates from the late 6th century BC, and his lineage is believed to represent early gene flow from Iberia to the Maghreb. Craniometric analysis of the young man indicated likely Mediterranean/European ancestry as opposed to African or Asian.

Climate change
Due to its coastal location, Carthage Archeological Site is vulnerable to sea level rise. In 2022, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report included it in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with the warming of over 4 °C (7.2 °F), and is no longer considered very likely. The other, more plausible scenarios result in lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet, sea levels would continue to increase for about 10,000 years under all of them. Even if the warming is limited to 1.5 °C (2.7 °F), global sea level rise is still expected to exceed 2–3 m (7–10 ft) after 2,000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger increases by then), consequently exceeding 2,100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~0.75 m (2 ft) with a range of 0.5–1 m (2–3 ft)) well before the year 4000. Thus, it is a matter of time before the Carthage Archeological Site is threatened by rising water levels, unless it can be protected by adaptation efforts such as sea walls.

Commune
The commune of Carthage was created by a decree of the Bey of Tunis on 15 June 1919, during the rule of Naceur Bey.
In 1920, the first seaplane base was built on the Lake of Tunis for the seaplanes of Compagnie Aéronavale. The Tunis Airfield opened in 1938, serving around 5,800 passengers annually on the Paris-Tunis route.
During World War II, the airport was used by the United States Army Air Force Twelfth Air Force as a headquarters and command control base for the Italian Campaign of 1943.
Construction on the Tunis-Carthage Airport, which was fully funded by France, began in 1944, and in 1948 the airport become the main hub for Tunisair.
In the 1950s the Lycée Français de Carthage was established to serve French families in Carthage. In 1961 it was given to the Tunisian government as part of the Independence of Tunisia, so the nearby Collège Maurice Cailloux in La Marsa, previously an annex of the Lycée Français de Carthage, was renamed to the Lycée Français de La Marsa and began serving the lycée level. It is currently the Lycée Gustave Flaubert.
After Tunisian independence in 1956, the Tunis conurbation gradually extended around the airport, and Carthage (قرطاج Qarṭāj) is now a suburb of Tunis, covering the area between Sidi Bou Said and Le Kram. Its population as of January 2013 was estimated at 21,276,
mostly attracting the more wealthy residents. If Carthage is not the capital, it tends to be the political pole, a "place of emblematic power" according to Sophie Bessis, leaving to Tunis the economic and administrative roles. The Carthage Palace (the Tunisian presidential palace) is located in the coast.
The suburb has six train stations of the TGM line between Le Kram and Sidi Bou Said:
Carthage Salammbo (named for the ancient children's cemetery where it stands), Carthage Byrsa (named for Byrsa hill), Carthage Dermech (Dermèche), Carthage Hannibal (named for Hannibal), Carthage Présidence (named for the Presidential Palace) and Carthage Amilcar (named for Hamilcar).

Trade and business
The merchants of Carthage were in part heirs of the Mediterranean trade developed by Phoenicia, and so also heirs of the rivalry with Greek merchants. Business activity was accordingly both stimulated and challenged. Cyprus had been an early site of such commercial contests. The Phoenicians then had ventured into the western Mediterranean, founding trading posts, including Utica and Carthage. The Greeks followed, entering the western seas where the commercial rivalry continued. Eventually it would lead, especially in Sicily, to several centuries of intermittent war. Although Greek-made merchandise was generally considered superior in design, Carthage also produced trade goods in abundance. That Carthage came to function as a manufacturing colossus was shown during the Third Punic War with Rome. Carthage, which had previously disarmed, then was made to face the fatal Roman siege. The city "suddenly organised the manufacture of arms" with great skill and effectiveness. According to Strabo (63 BC – AD 21) in his Geographica:

[Carthage] each day produced one hundred and forty finished shields, three hundred swords, five hundred spears, and one thousand missiles for the catapults... . Furthermore, [Carthage although surrounded by the Romans] built one hundred and twenty decked ships in two months... for old timber had been stored away in readiness, and a large number of skilled workmen, maintained at public expense.
The textile industry in Carthage probably started in private homes, but the existence of professional weavers indicates that a sort of factory system later developed. Products included embroidery, carpets, and use of the purple murex dye (for which the Carthaginian isle of Djerba was famous). Metalworkers developed specialized skills, i.e., making various weapons for the armed forces, as well as domestic articles, such as knives, forks, scissors, mirrors, and razors (all articles found in tombs). Artwork in metals included vases and lamps in bronze, also bowls, and plates. Other products came from such crafts as the potters, the glassmakers, and the goldsmiths. Inscriptions on votive stele indicate that many were not slaves but 'free citizens'.

Phoenician and Punic merchant ventures were often run as a family enterprise, putting to work its members and its subordinate clients. Such family-run businesses might perform a variety of tasks: own and maintain the ships, providing the captain and crew; do the negotiations overseas, either by barter or buying and selling, of their own manufactured commodities and trade goods, and native products (metals, foodstuffs, etc.) to carry and trade elsewhere; and send their agents to stay at distant outposts in order to make lasting local contacts, and later to establish a warehouse of shipped goods for exchange, and eventually perhaps a settlement. Over generations, such activity might result in the creation of a wide-ranging network of trading operations. Ancillary would be the growth of reciprocity between different family firms, foreign and domestic.
State protection was extended to its sea traders by the Phoenician city of Tyre and later likewise by the daughter city-state of Carthage. Stéphane Gsell, the well-regarded French historian of ancient North Africa, summarized the major principles guiding the civic rulers of Carthage with regard to its policies for trade and commerce:

to open and maintain markets for its merchants, whether by entering into direct contact with foreign peoples using either treaty negotiations or naval power, or by providing security for isolated trading stations
the reservation of markets exclusively for the merchants of Carthage, or where competition could not be eliminated, to regulate trade by state-sponsored agreements with its commercial rivals
suppression of piracy, and promotion of Carthage's ability to freely navigate the seas
Both the Phoenicians and the Carthaginians were well known in antiquity for their secrecy in general, and especially pertaining to commercial contacts and trade routes. Both cultures excelled in commercial dealings. Strabo (63 BC – AD 21), the Greek geographer, wrote that before its fall (in 146 BC) Carthage enjoyed a population of 700,000 and directed an alliance of 300 cities. The Greek historian Polybius (c. 203–120) referred to Carthage as "the wealthiest city in the world".

Constitution of state
A "suffet" (possibly two) was elected by the citizens, and held office with no military power for a one-year term. Carthaginian generals marshalled mercenary armies and were separately elected. From about 550 to 450 the Magonid family monopolized the top military position; later the Barcid family acted similarly. Eventually it came to be that, after a war, the commanding general had to testify justifying his actions before a court of 104 judges.
Aristotle (384–322) discusses Carthage in his work, Politica; he begins: "The Carthaginians are also considered to have an excellent form of government." He briefly describes the city as a "mixed constitution", a political arrangement with cohabiting elements of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, i.e., a king (Gk: basileus), a council of elders (Gk: gerusia), and the people (Gk: demos). Later Polybius of Megalopolis (c. 204–122, Greek) in his Histories would describe the Roman Republic in more detail as a mixed constitution in which the Consuls were the monarchy, the Senate the aristocracy, and the Assemblies the democracy.
Evidently Carthage also had an institution of elders who advised the Suffets, similar to a Greek gerusia or the Roman Senate. We do not have a Punic name for this body. At times its members would travel with an army general on campaign. Members also formed permanent committees. The institution had several hundred members drawn from the wealthiest class who held office for life. Vacancies were probably filled by recruitment from among the elite, i.e., by co-option. From among its members were selected the 104 Judges mentioned above. Later the 104 would come to evaluate not only army generals but other office holders as well. Aristotle regarded the 104 as most important; he compared it to the ephorate of Sparta with regard to control over security. In Hannibal's time, such a Judge held office for life. At some stage there also came to be independent self-perpetuating boards of five who filled vacancies and supervised (non-military) government administration.
Popular assemblies also existed at Carthage. When deadlocked the Suffets and the quasi-senatorial institution of elders might request the assembly to vote; also, assembly votes were requested in very crucial matters in order to achieve political consensus and popular coherence. The assembly members had no legal wealth or birth qualification. How its members were selected is unknown, e.g., whether by festival group or urban ward or another method.
The Greeks were favourably impressed by the constitution of Carthage; Aristotle had a separate study of it made, which is lost. In his Politica he states: "The government of Carthage is oligarchical, but they successfully escape the evils of oligarchy by enriching one portion of the people after another by sending them to their colonies." "[T]heir policy is to send some [poorer citizens] to their dependent towns, where they grow rich." Yet Aristotle continues, "[I]f any misfortune occurred, and the bulk of the subjects revolted, there would be no way of restoring peace by legal means." Aristotle remarked also:

Many of the Carthaginian institutions are excellent. The superiority of their constitution is proved by the fact that the common people remain loyal to the constitution; the Carthaginians have never had any rebellion worth speaking of, and have never been under the rule of a tyrant.
The city-state of Carthage, whose citizens were mainly Libyphoenicians (of Phoenician ancestry born in Africa), dominated and exploited an agricultural countryside composed mainly of native Berber sharecroppers and farmworkers, whose affiliations to Carthage were open to divergent possibilities. Beyond these more settled Berbers and the Punic farming towns and rural manors, lived the independent Berber tribes, who were mostly pastoralists.
In the brief, uneven review of government at Carthage found in his Politica Aristotle mentions several faults. Thus, "that the same person should hold many offices, which is a favorite practice among the Carthaginians." Aristotle disapproves, mentioning the flute-player and the shoemaker. Also, that "magistrates should be chosen not only for their merit but for their wealth." Aristotle's opinion is that focus on pursuit of wealth will lead to oligarchy and its evils.

[S]urely it is a bad thing that the greatest offices... should be bought. The law which allows this abuse makes wealth of more account than virtue, and the whole state becomes avaricious. For, whenever the chiefs of the state deem anything honorable, the other citizens are sure to follow their example; and, where virtue has not the first place, their aristocracy cannot be firmly established.
In Carthage the people seemed politically satisfied and submissive, according to the historian Warmington. They in their assemblies only rarely exercised the few opportunities given them to assent to state decisions. Popular influence over government appears not to have been an issue at Carthage. Being a commercial republic fielding a mercenary army, the people were not conscripted for military service, an experience which can foster the feel for popular political action. But perhaps this misunderstands the society; perhaps the people, whose values were based on small-group loyalty, felt themselves sufficiently connected to their city's leadership by the very integrity of the person-to-person linkage within their social fabric. Carthage was very stable; there were few openings for tyrants. Only after defeat by Rome devastated Punic imperial ambitions did the people of Carthage seem to question their governance and to show interest in political reform.
In 196, following the Second Punic War (218–201), Hannibal, still greatly admired as a Barcid military leader, was elected suffet. When his reforms were blocked by a financial official about to become a judge for life, Hannibal rallied the populace against the 104 judges. He proposed a one-year term for the 104, as part of a major civic overhaul. Additionally, the reform included a restructuring of the city's revenues, and the fostering of trade and agriculture. The changes rather quickly resulted in a noticeable increase in prosperity. Yet his incorrigible political opponents cravenly went to Rome, to charge Hannibal with conspiracy, namely, plotting war against Rome in league with Antiochus the Hellenic ruler of Syria. Although the Roman Scipio Africanus resisted such manoeuvre, eventually intervention by Rome forced Hannibal to leave Carthage. Thus, corrupt city officials efficiently blocked Hannibal in his efforts to reform the government of Carthage.
Mago (6th century) was King of Carthage; the head of state, war leader, and religious figurehead. His family was considered to possess a sacred quality. Mago's office was somewhat similar to that of a pharaoh, but although kept in a family it was not hereditary, it was limited by legal consent. Picard, accordingly, believes that the council of elders and the popular assembly are late institutions. Carthage was founded by the king of Tyre who had a royal monopoly on this trading venture. Thus it was the royal authority stemming from this traditional source of power that the King of Carthage possessed. Later, as other Phoenician ship companies entered the trading region, and so associated with the city-state, the King of Carthage had to keep order among a rich variety of powerful merchants in their negotiations among themselves and over risky commerce across the Mediterranean. Under these circumstance, the office of king began to be transformed. Yet it was not until the aristocrats of Carthage became wealthy owners of agricultural lands in Africa that a council of elders was institutionalized at Carthage.

Contemporary sources
Most ancient literature concerning Carthage comes from Greek and Roman sources as Carthage's own documents were destroyed by the Romans. Apart from inscriptions, hardly any Punic literature has survived, and none in its own language and script. A brief catalogue would include:

three short treaties with Rome (Latin translations);
several pages of Hanno the Navigator's log-book concerning his fifth century maritime exploration of the Atlantic coast of west Africa (Greek translation);
fragments quoted from Mago's fourth/third century 28-volume treatise on agriculture (Latin translations);
the Roman playwright Plautus (c. 250 – 184) in his Poenulus incorporates a few fictional speeches delivered in Punic, whose written lines are transcribed into Latin letters phonetically;
the thousands of inscriptions made in Punic script, thousands, but many extremely short, e.g., a dedication to a deity with the personal name(s) of the devotee(s).
"[F]rom the Greek author Plutarch [(c. 46 – c. 120)] we learn of the 'sacred books' in Punic safeguarded by the city's temples. Few Punic texts survive, however." Once "the City Archives, the Annals, and the scribal lists of Suffets" existed, but evidently these were destroyed in the horrific fires during the Roman capture of the city in 146 BC.
Yet some Punic books (Latin: libri punici) from the libraries of Carthage reportedly did survive the fires. These works were apparently given by Roman authorities to the newly augmented Berber rulers. Over a century after the fall of Carthage, the Roman politician-turned-author Gaius Sallustius Crispus or Sallust (86–34) reported his having seen volumes written in Punic, which books were said to be once possessed by the Berber king, Hiempsal II (r. 88–81). By way of Berber informants and Punic translators, Sallust had used these surviving books to write his brief sketch of Berber affairs.

Probably some of Hiempsal II's libri punici, that had escaped the fires that consumed Carthage in 146 BC, wound up later in the large royal library of his grandson Juba II (r. 25 BC–AD 24). Juba II not only was a Berber king, and husband of Cleopatra's daughter, but also a scholar and author in Greek of no less than nine works. He wrote for the Mediterranean-wide audience then enjoying classical literature. The libri punici inherited from his grandfather surely became useful to him when composing his Libyka, a work on North Africa written in Greek. Only fragments of Libyka survive, mostly from quotations made by other ancient authors. It may have been Juba II who 'discovered' the five-centuries-old 'log book' of Hanno the Navigator, called the Periplus, among library documents saved from fallen Carthage.
In the end, however, most Punic writings that survived the destruction of Carthage "did not escape the immense wreckage in which so many of Antiquity's literary works perished." Accordingly, the long and continuous interactions between Punic citizens of Carthage and the Berber communities that surrounded the city have no local historian. Their political arrangements and periodic crises, their economic and work life, the cultural ties and social relations established and nourished (infrequently as kin), are not known to us directly from ancient Punic authors in written accounts. Neither side has left us their stories about life in Punic-era Carthage.
Regarding Phoenician writings, few remain and these seldom refer to Carthage. The more ancient and most informative are cuneiform tablets, c. 1600–1185, from ancient Ugarit, located to the north of Phoenicia on the Syrian coast; it was a Canaanite city politically affiliated with the Hittites. The clay tablets tell of myths, epics, rituals, medical and administrative matters, and also correspondence. The highly valued works of Sanchuniathon, an ancient priest of Beirut, who reportedly wrote on Phoenician religion and the origins of civilization, are themselves completely lost, but some little content endures twice removed. Sanchuniathon was said to have lived in the 11th century, which is considered doubtful. Much later a Phoenician History by Philo of Byblos (64–141) reportedly existed, written in Greek, but only fragments of this work survive. An explanation proffered for why so few Phoenician works endured: early on (11th century) archives and records began to be kept on papyrus, which does not long survive in a moist coastal climate. Also, both Phoenicians and Carthaginians were well known for their secrecy.
Thus, of their ancient writings we have little of major interest left to us by Carthage, or by Phoenicia the country of origin of the city founders. "Of the various Phoenician and Punic compositions alluded to by the ancient classical authors, not a single work or even fragment has survived in its original idiom." "Indeed, not a single Phoenician manuscript has survived in the original [language] or in translation." We cannot therefore access directly the line of thought or the contour of their worldview as expressed in their own words, in their own voice. Ironically, it was the Phoenicians who "invented or at least perfected and transmitted a form of writing [the alphabet] that has influenced dozens of cultures including our own."
As noted, the celebrated ancient books on agriculture written by Mago of Carthage survives only via quotations in Latin from several later Roman works.

See also
History of Carthage
Carthage tophet
Asterius Chapel
Mosaic of the Horses of Carthage
Necropolis of the Rabs

Notes
References
Bibliography
Altekamp, Stefan (2024). Karthago. Archäologische Stadtbiographie [Carthage. Archaeological biography of the city]. Berlin/Boston: de Gruyter, ISBN 978-3-11-133217-8.
Aubet, Maria Eugenia (1987), The Phoenicians and the West: Politics, Colonies, and Trade, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bath, Tony (1981), Hannibal's Campaigns, New York: Barnes & Noble Books.
Beschaouch, Azedine (1993), La légende de Carthage [The Legend of Carthage], Découvertes Gallimard, vol. 172, Paris: Gallimard. (in French)
Charles-Picard, Gibert; et al. (1958), La vie quotidienne à Carthage au temps d'Hannibal [Daily Life in Carthage in the Time of Hannibal], Paris: Hachette. (in French)
Freed, J. (2011), Bringing Carthage Home: The Excavations of Nathan Davis, 1856–1859.
Hall, Joshua R. (2023). Carthage at War: Punic Armies c. 814–146 BC. Pen and Sword Military. ISBN 978-1-4738-8541-7.
Hoyos, Dexter (2021). Carthage. A biography. London/New York: Routledge, ISBN 978-1-138-78820-6.
Li, Hansong. "Locating Mobile Sovereignty: Carthage in Natural Jurisprudence". History of Political Thought. 43 (2): 246–272.
Lipiński, Edward (2004), Itineraria Phoenicia, Leuven: Uitgeverij Peeters en Department Oosterse Studies.
Miles, Richard (2011), Carthage Must Be Destroyed: The Rise and Fall of an Ancient Civilization, Viking.
Raven, S. (2002), Rome in Africa, 3rd ed.
Soren, David; et al. (1990), Carthage: Uncovering the Mysteries and Splendors of Ancient Tunisia, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Winterer, Caroline (2010), "Model Empire, Lost City: Ancient Carthage and the Science of Politics in Revolutionary America", The William and Mary Quarterly, 67 (1): 3–30, doi:10.5309/willmaryquar.67.1.3, JSTOR 10.5309/willmaryquar.67.1.3

External links

 The dictionary definition of Carthago at Wiktionary
 Carthage travel guide from Wikivoyage
 Media related to Carthage at Wikimedia Commons


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 2,054
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D9%82%D8%B1%D8%B7%D8%A7%D8%AC
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

قرطاج تقع قرب مدينة تونس في الجمهورية التونسية. في الشّمال الشّرقي للجمهورية على بعد 15 كلم من العاصمة فوق ربوة ارتفاعها تقريبا 57 م ويمتد شريطها الساحلي على حوالي 3 كلم، ويحدها البحر الأبيض المتوسط شرقا وبلدية سيدي أبي سعيد شمالا وبلدية المرسى غربا وبلدية الكرم جنوبا. مساحة المنطقة 640 هكتارا ومساحة المناطق الأثرية 407 هكتار تقريبا 63,58% من المساحة الإجمالية. ويختلف مناخها المتوسّطي عن مناخ العاصمة، بلطف شتائه وبرودة صيفه. وبمقتضى الأمر رقم 1246 لسنة 1985 صنف موقع قرطاج ضمن قائمة التراث العالمي التي وضعتها اليونسكو. وبصفتها مدينة سياحية يزورها ما يقارب مليون سائح سنويا. عدد السكان 15,922

تأسيس قرطاج
أسست الأميرة الفينيقية عليسة (أليسا أو أليسار) قرطاج عام 814 ق م.، حسب رواية المؤرخين القدماء. وجاءت الأميرة هاربة من أخيها مع أصحابها من مدينة صور بلبنان، وسموا المدينة        «قَرْت حَدَشْت» بمعنى «المدينة الجديدة» (من الفينيقية: قَرْت أي مدينة أو قرية، وحَدَشْت أي حديثة)، فأصبح الاسم «قرطاج» عن طريق النطق اللاتيني. وكانوا يعبدون خاصة «ملقرت»، واسمه يعني «ملك المدينة».

التاريخ
قرطاج البونية (الفينيقية)
تأسيس قرطاج 814 ق م: حقيقة|هربت عليسة أميرة صور المعروفة باسم الملكة ديدون من قهر أخيها بيقماليون ملك فينيقيا، وقامت برحلة طويلة حول حوض البحر الأبيض المتوسط بحثا عن موقع متميّز يمكّنها من تأسيس مدينة جديدة «قرط حدشت».
من القرن 7 ق.م. إلى القرن 4 ق.م: بسطت قرطاج إمبراطوريتها وأسّست مستعمرات فينيقيّة جديدة، إمتدّت من غرب البحر الأبيض المتوسط إلى حدود السواحل الأطلسيّـة لوسط أفريقيا.
من 264 ق.م إلى 146 ق.م: عاشت قرطاج في هذه المدّة ثلاث حروب عظيمة ضد روما سُمّيت بالحروب البونيقية والتي دارت بين قرطاج وروما وشهدت حملة عسكرية قام بها القائد العظيم حنبعل الذي قطع جبال الألب بواسطة أفياله من سنة 218 ق.م إلى سنة 202 ق.م. وانتهت هذه الحروب بهزيمة قرطاج وسقوطها.
الحرب البونيّة الأولى: 264 ق.م-241 ق.م: عند إنتصار الأسطول الروماني في 241 ق.م. طلبت قرطاج الصلح وفقدت صقلية.
الحرب البونية الثانية: 219 ق.م-201 ق.م: بعد إنتصاراته المجدية ضد الرومان هزم القائد القرطاجني حنبعل سنة 202 ق.م في معركة زاما.
الحرب البونية الثالثة: 149 ق.م-146 ق.م: سنة 146 ق.م دُمِّرت قرطاج كُليا من قبل سيبيون الإميلي.

قرطاج الرومانية
لمّا ألحقت قرطاج بالإمبراطورية الرومانية، أعيد بناؤها في عهد أغسطس (إمبراطور) في أواخر القرن الأوّل ق.م، فزوّدت بما تمتاز به مدينة رومانيّة كبيرة من بنى تحتيّة حضريّة وبنايات عموميّة دينيّة ومدنيّة ومساكن فخمة. وغدت قرطاج عاصمة إداريّة وثقافيّة وفنّية لمقاطعة أفريكا، فعاشت فترة من الازدهار الكبير وبلغت درجة عالية من الترف وشهدت حركة إبداعيّة ثقافيّة وفنيّة قويّة، قبل أن يصيبها التقهقر الذي أصاب الإمبراطورية الرومانية عند أفول نجمها سنة 235 م وتعرّضت للإضطرابات وعمت الفوضى قرطاج.

قرطاج المسيحية
عرفت قرطاج في حكم قسطنطين الأول سنة 312 م فترة من الرفاهة والثروة وانتشار الدين المسيحي حيث سيطرت المسيحية تماما على كل شمال أفريقيا.

قرطاج الوندالية 439-534 م
رغم مقاومة هجمات الوندال التي دامت قرابة الثماني سنوات سقطت قرطاج عام 440 م
وتعرضت معالمها إلى النهب والتدمير والحرق وخاصة المسرح والأديون وحمامات أنطونيوس والكنائس.

قرطاج البيزنطية
حرر بيليزار قرطاج من هيمنة الوندال عام 534 م وعرفت المدينة مرة أخرى رفاهية حقيقية ونهضة جديدة.

قرطاج الإسلامية
يمثل عام 670 م بداية الفتح الإسلامي، فقد أرسل الخليفة الأموي حسان بن النعمان على الجيش الذي دخل إفريقية مع عقبة بن نافع، ورغم انتصاراته في الجنوب التونسي، اصطدم عقبة بن نافع بمقاومة شديدة من رومانيه مع السكان الاصليين البربر وقد تغلّبوا عليه فيما بعد في منطقة تهودة بالجزائر، لكن قتل فيما بعد ليواجه الكاهنة ديهيا. وفي سنة 698 م تمكن حسان بن النعمان من الانتصار على كل التحالف البيزنطي والبربري ومنذ الفتح الإسلامي فقدت قرطاج مركزها كعاصمة وعوضتها تباعا القيروان فالمهدية وأخيرا تونس.

قرطاج المعاصرة
حاولت المسيحية خلال منتصف القرن التاسع عشر استعادة مجدها الديني في قرطاج حيث قام الكاردينال لافيجري سنة 1857م ببناء الكنيسة «كاتيدرال سان لويس» وعندما بسطت الحماية الفرنسية نفوذها على تونس قامت الكنيسة الكاثوليكية بإحياء إبريشية القديس سيبريان (كان أسقف قرطاج منذ عام 249 م وأبًا وكاتبًا مسيحيًا).
أصبحت قرطاج منذ بداية القرن العشرين مقرا لإقامة الأمين باي آخر بايات تونس.
وفي هذا المكان أعلن رئيس الحكومة الفرنسي مانداس فرانس عن الاستقلال الداخلي لتونس في 31 آب/يوليو 1954.
وبعد الإعلان عن الجمهورية في 25 آب/يوليو 1957 شيد الحبيب بورقيبة أول رئيس للجمهورية قصرا ليصبح مقرا لرئاسة الجمهورية.
تعد قرطاج اليوم من الضواحي الراقية للعاصمة تونس وتوجد بها عدة مؤسسات وطنية خاصة المرتبطة برئاسة الجمهورية التونسية إضافة إلى مجموعة من الفنادق.

منشآت مدينة قرطاج
تعليميا: فيها 5 مدارس أساسية ومعهد إعدادي واحد و3 معاهد ثانوية والمعهد الأعلى لإطارات الطفولة قرطاج درمش والمعهد الأعلى للدراسات التجارية وبيت الحكمة (المجمع التونسي للعلوم والآداب) ودار الحوت (المعهد الوطني لعلوم وتكنولوجبا البحار) والمعهد الوطني لتكوين المكونين في التربية.
اقتصاديا: تحوي عدة فروع لمصارف متعددة ونزلين و4 مطاعم سياحية.
صحيا: تحوي مستوصفين بالإضافة لمصحات ومخابر وصيدليات وعيادات خاصة في مختلف الاختصاصات.
إداريا: فيها المعتمدية و3 مكاتب للبريد والبرق والهاتف ومنطقة الأمن الوطني والوكالة التجارية للمواصلات ومحكمة الناحية الخاصة بها والقباضة المالية بقرطاج بيرسا.
سياسيا: قصر الرئاسة بقرطاج المقر الرسمي للإقامة والعمل لرئيس الجمهورية التونسية

مقالات عن قرطاج
قرطاج العاصمة في إفريقيا الفينيقية – رؤية أثرية د. خليل المقداد 2008
يذكر فيها: تأسيس المدينة: لقد كانت البداية في تأسيس المدينة الفينيقية قرطاج فوق أنف المنقار الإفريقي الشمالي المطل على منتصف الساحل الجنوبي لحوض البحر الأبيض المتوسط حين رست سفينة الأميرة الفينيقية إيليسا ديدون على ضفاف الهضبة حاملةً الأميرة الفينيقية القادمة من عام 814 ق. م أي منذ 2825 عاماً مضت. وقد دخلت السفينة ورست على الشاطئ الإفريقي في وضح النهار ودخل معها نور التاريخ والحضارة. ثم لحق بالأميرة أمير سوري فينيقي يدعى عينة بعد حريق مدينة طروادة، وهناك عشق الأميرة الفينيقية إيليسا Elissa من مدينة صور التي أسست مدينة قرطاج في القرن التاسع ق. م، ولظروفٍ غامضة أجبر على الهرب إلى إيطاليا وأسس هناك العديد من المدن ومنها مدينة لافينيوم Lavinium ومدينة روما.
وحسب ما جاء في الملحمة الشعرية الإينيد Eneide للشاعر اللاتيني بوبيليوس فيرجيليوس ماروpublius virgilius maro (70-19 ق. م) صديق أوكتاف أن إينيه /عينة Enee الهارب أحبَّ ديدون/ إيليسا وتزوجها، إلا أنه أجبر على هجرها بناءً على أوامر الإله زيوس/ جوبيتير ولهذا قتلته. ويذكر في المعتقدات الدينية الرومانية أيضاً أن روميليوس/ رومولوس Romulus مؤسس مدينة روما من أحفاد عينة وزوجته الفينيقية إيليسا من مدينة قرطاج.

الثقافة
تحتوي مدينة قرطاج على مكتبة عمومية ومركزا ثقافيا و20 رواقا فنيا وفيها الأكربوليوم وتضم متحفا واحدا متحف قرطاج و20 متنزها عموميا.

مهرجان قرطاج الدولي
هو مهرجان سنوي للموسيقى، ينتظم في الفترة المتدة من منتصف شهر (يوليو، تموز) إلى منتصف شهر آب من كل سنة منذ سنة 1964 بمدينة قرطاج الساحلية، الواقعة قرب مدينة تونس. يحتضن المسرح الأثري بقرطاج فعاليات هذا المهرجان كل سنة ويعتبر مهرجان قرطاج من أبرز المهرجانات العربية والعالمية واعرقها.
وكذلك يقام فيها مهرجان أيام قرطاج المسرحية وفعاليات أخرى متعددة.

متحف قرطاج
ينتصب المتحف على قمة هضبة بيرسا تم إنشاؤه عام 1875 م. وهو من حيث التنظيم المتحفي يحفظ ويعرض مجموعات من التحف الأثرية التي وجدت في هذا الموقع ويمثل ثلاث فترات كبـرى: الفترة الفينيقيـة البونيـة، الفترة الرومانية الإفريقية والفترة العربية الإسلامية.

المعالم الاثرية الأخرى
الحي البونيقي والفوروم: يقع هذا الحي بجوار متحف قرطاج الوطني وداخل نطاقه إذ يشكل جناحا تابعا لهذا المتحف يقع في الهواء الطلق. وقد تمت تهيئة هذا الحي في عهد حنبعل (في أوائل القرن الثاني ق م). وهو حي سكني تخترقه شوارع تتقاطع حسب زاوية قائمة، وتقوم داخله مجموعة من المباني ذات الطوابق نجدها مجزأة إلى شقق سكنية على غرار البناء الحديث. كما نجد به دكاكين مفتوحة على الشارع بالطابق الأرضي من المباني.
دمر حي بيرسا وأحرق مع كامل المدينة في سنة 146 ق م، ولكنه ظل محميا من الاندثار تحت طبقة ضخمة من التراب والأنقاض جنبته الزوال والتسوية بالأرض خلال قرون عدة.

حمامات أنطونيوس: شيدت الحمامات على شاطئ البحر في منتصف القرن الثاني بعد الميلاد (145 م- 162م) ثم دمرها الوندال فبقيت مدة طويلة مغمورة تحت التراب. ولم يتم الكشف عنها وإزاحة التربة من فوقها إلا بعد سنة 1945.
تأتي هذه الحمامات في المرتبة الثالثة في العالم من حيث الحجم بعد حمامات كاركالا بإيطاليا وحمامات ديوكليسيان بسوريا. ولم يبق منها اليوم سوى الطابق تحت الأرضي الذي كانت به غرف مقببة تمثل القاعات الفخمة للحمامات، وفي المحور الأوسط توجد القاعة الباردة (Frigidaire) مقاييسها 47 × 22 مترا محمولة على ثمانية أعمدة من الغرانيت كبيرة الحجم من ضمنها واحدة تم ترميمها لإعطاء فكرة عن ارتفاعها (15 مترا مع التاج) كما توجد القاعة الساخنة على شكل قبة. ومن الجهتين تمتد، بالتناظر، الأجنحة المكونة من غرف منتصبة بانتظام حول الصحن المكشوف على الساحة.

حي المنازل الرومانية: يحتوي هذا الحي على مجموعة من المنازل الارستقراطية موزعة بتناسق على سفح الهضبة الشرقية للاديون أو المسرح وعلى طول الكاردو و«دوكيمانوس» (نهجان بقرطاج حسب تقسيم الشوارع الرومانية القديمة) وتخترق ممرات وفق رسم الشوارع الرومانية القديمة. ومن بين المعالم التي لا تزال قائمة:
- مبنى «السكولا» Schola وهو مقر جمعية سياسية دينية، تقام فيه الطقوس الإمبراطورية
- كنيسة مسيحية تعود إلى القرن السابع
- كنيسة ذات طابع معماري بيزنطي خالص
- مقبرة بونيقية
- منزل روماني يعود تاريخه إلى القرن الثالث تم ترميمه جزئيا في سنة 1960 وأطلق عليه اسم "villa de la voliére " فيه رسوم فيفسائية تغطي أرضية البهو.

الأديون: أو المسرح ويتقدم هذا المعلم شمالا بهو في شكل مستطيل قد تهدم كليا ولم يبق منه سوى الأسس وبعض العناصر المعمارية وبعض الزينة التي عثر عليها خلال الحفريات 1900-1901.
وقد أخرجت من الصهاريج الموجودة في الطابق تحت أرضي مجموعة كبيرة من أجزاء مرمرية وتماثيل وأجزاء معمارية كانت من ضمن زخرفة «الأديون».
وكان هذا المعلم محل حفريات وبحث ودراسة من سنة 1994 إلى سنة 1999.

مسرح قرطاج الروماني: شيد المسرح الروماني في أوائل القرن الثاني قبل الميلاد على ضفاف هضبة «أوديون» Odeon» «ويتميز هذا المعلم بهندسته وزخرفته وبمدارجه نصف الدائرية التي يفوق قطرها 100 م تتخللها أعمدة متوجة من الرخام المزركش.
وزين مسرح قرطاج بتماثيل من بينها تمثال أبولون والذي تم إيداعه بمتحف باردو. لعب هذا المسرح دورا هاما جدا في حياة مواطني قرطاج الذين كانوا مولعين بالمسرح والموسيقى وفن المحاكاة والفلسفة مما ساهم في إشعاع الثقافة في تلك الحقبة.
وقد رمم سنة 1967 ليكون فضاء مهرجان قرطاج الدولي.

كنيسة داموس الكريطة: يضم هذا المركب الديني الشاسع كنيستان وبعض المباني الملحقة بهما. عثر عليه في أفريقية الرومانية (65 م/ 45 م) فإنها تبدو مقسمة إلى أجنحة عديدة بأعمدة لم يبق لها أثر زيادة على جناحين كبيرين يتلاقيان وسط المعلم وينتهي كل منها بصدرفي الجنوب الشرقي والجنوب الغربي.
صهاريج المعلقة: تتكون من 15 صهريجا طول الواحد 100 متر وعرضه 7 أمتار وارتفاعه 7,50 متر، تحتل كلها أكثر من هكتار من المساحة وتبلغ كمية خزنها أكثر من 50.000 متر مكعب. وقد استعملت هذه الصهاريج في القرون الوسطى من طرف سكان القرى المجاورة.
المسرح الدائري بقرطاج: يوجد في مدخل المدينة من جهة الطريق السريعة تونس – قرطاج. كانت ساحة الأنفتياتر شاهدة على كل المعارك الدامية التي وقعت بين المصارعين والمحكومين عليهم بالإعدام والحيوانات المفترسة. وكانت الغاية من هذه المصارعة التي ينظمها الحاكم إبراز للرعية مصير كل خارج عن سياسة حكمه. وقد بني منذ تأسيس المدينة بمساحة حوالي 120 مترا×93 متر، وحلبة تبلغ مساحتها 64 مترا× 36 متر. ووقع توسيعه في القرنين الثاني والثالث إلى أن بلغ مساحته 156م ×128 م وبلغ حجم استيعابه أكثر من 41 ألف نسمة.
حي ماغون: اكتشف حي ماقون بعد حفريات عدة أجريت على ضفاف البحر. ويمثل هذا الموقع تجمعا سكنيا يعود إلى القرن الخامس ق م ويتميز بتواجد حي حسب تصميم متناسق محمي بسور مزود بكل شيء بمــا في ذلك مرسى بحري.
وفي الفترة الأخيرة وقع تحوير في الحي حيث وسعت المنازل وأصبحت تضم فناء وأعمدة وطابقا علويا ويوجد بالحي خزانات وآبار تزوده بالماء، كما تدل بقايا الحي المدهون والأرضية المزوقة على قيمة المعمار في تلك الحقبة من التاريخ.
لقد دمر الحي في قرطاج البونية لكن الرومان أسسوا عاصمة جديـدة على الموقع ذاته وحافظوا على نفس النسق العمراني الذي امتد على كامـــل أرض المدينة.

مدفن " التوفاة ": كان القرطاجيون يعتقدون في وجود عالم فوقي مليء بالكائنات المقدسة المنظمة، فقاموا ببعض الطقوس التي تضمن للمؤمن الرخاء والسعادة في الأرض وأيضا الخلاص الأبدي للروح ولقد كانوا يعبدون آلهة كثيرة من أصل فينيقي، ملقوت وعشترت وخصوصا بعل حامون إله المطر ورب المياه والنبات ورفيقته تانيت آلاهة الحياة والخصب التي يظهر اسمها على آلاف الآثار القرطاجية.
المواني البونية:
المعلم الدائري:

الرياضة
فيها الملعب البلدي فتحي زهير وقاعة رياضية وملعب تنس.

توأمة
صور، لبنان، عام 2002 م.
 فرساي، فرنسا، عام 1998 م.
 آكس آن بروفانس، فرنسا، عام 1993 م.
 قرطاجنة، إسبانيا، 1989 م.

المراجع
5.التاريخ المغاربي السياسي والحضاري: محمد الهادي حارش

المصادر
موقع بلدية قرطاج الحكومي
موقع الباحثون
الفسيفساء السورية والمعتقدات الدينية القديمة (الميثولوجيا) دراسة مقارنة - منشورات وزارة الثقافة - سورية - دمشق 2008 - ص 188 - 190.
الفُلك والميناء الفينيقي والبحث الأثري في قاع البحر - مجلة الباحثون - العدد 3 كانون الأول 2008.
Musee nationale de Carthage - Carthage 1994. (المتحف الوطني بقرطاج).

انظر أيضاً
تاريخ قرطاجة السياسي
تاريخ قرطاجة الثقافي
حصار قرطاجة
أوذنة
قائمة بلديات تونس
تونس (مدينة)
حضارة قرطاجية
الموقع الأثري بقرطاج
إمبراطورية قرطاجية


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 3,313
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carthage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Carthage  (arabe : قرطاج, Qarṭāj, /qærtˤɑʒ/, ) est une ville tunisienne située au nord-est de la capitale Tunis.
L'ancienne cité punique, Qart Hadasht, berceau de la civilisation carthaginoise, détruite puis reconstruite par les Romains qui en font la capitale de la province d'Afrique proconsulaire, est aujourd'hui l'une des municipalités les plus huppées du Grand Tunis, résidence officielle du président de la République, regroupant de nombreuses résidences d'ambassadeurs ou de richissimes fortunes tunisiennes et expatriées. La ville possède encore de nombreux sites archéologiques, romains pour la plupart avec quelques éléments puniques, classés au patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco depuis le 27 juillet 1979.
La municipalité de Carthage, qui compte 17 010 habitants en 2014, abrite le palais présidentiel, la mosquée Mâlik ibn Anas, le musée national de Carthage, l'université de Carthage ou encore l'Académie tunisienne des sciences, des lettres et des arts. L'aéroport international de Tunis-Carthage est situé à quelques kilomètres à l'ouest de la ville.

Toponymie
Le nom de Carthage provient du phénicien Qart-Hadašt ou QRT.HDŠT (prononcé : Qart Hadasht, qui signifie « Nouvelle ville », ce qui pourrait faire penser à « Nouvelle Tyr ». Sous la domination romaine, la ville prend le nom de Carthago (latin : Karthago, /'kar.ta.go/).
L'ancienne ville de Carthagène en Ibérie (actuelle Espagne) porte aussi le même nom de Qart Hadasht.

Géographie
La ville de Carthage se situe dans le Nord-Est de la Tunisie, à environ 15 kilomètres de la capitale Tunis, sur une colline s'élevant à 57 mètres d'altitude et avec un littoral s'étendant sur environ 3 kilomètres. Elle est délimitée à l'Est par la mer Méditerranée (golfe de Tunis), au Nord par Sidi Bou Saïd, à l'Ouest par La Marsa et au Sud par Le Kram.

Histoire
Civilisation carthaginoise
Carthage est fondée par la reine Didon de Tyr en 814 av. J.-C.. D'après la légende, ce serait la reine Didon — ou Élyssa —, sœur du roi de Tyr, Pygmalion, qui fonda la cité. La reine aurait demandé au souverain local Hiarbas, un roi libyque, l'autorisation de fonder un royaume sur ses terres. Celui-ci lui offrit alors un terrain aussi grand qu'une peau de vache. La reine plus maligne fait couper une peau de vache en lanières très fines et trace les contours de Carthage. En référence à cette fondatrice mythique, les Carthaginois sont parfois surnommés les « enfants de Didon » dans la littérature.

La ville devient une puissance dominante en Méditerranée occidentale au IVe siècle av. J.-C. Les Carthaginois pratiquaient un culte polythéiste originaire du Moyen-Orient. Ils vénéraient en particulier Baal et Tanit. Rome les accusa longtemps de sacrifier des enfants (cérémonie du molk), ce qu'il convient de nuancer. Une hypothèse parmi d'autres suggère que le rituel d'incinération avait surtout pour objectif de renvoyer l'âme des enfants défunts par le plus court chemin vers Ba'al Hammon à une époque où la mortalité infantile était plus qu'importante malgré les progrès en matière d'hygiène.
D'après d'autres sources, le sacrifice d'enfants bien vivants, généralement l'aîné des familles de notables, dans le but de prouver la sincérité de leur dévouement à Carthage, semble avoir initié la coutume de ces derniers d'adopter un enfant d'esclave pour cet usage.
Ce sont les Carthaginois qui introduisent le glaive court en fer dans le bassin méditerranéen, car jusqu'alors, les guerriers s'affrontent à l'aide de lances et de frondes. Carthage conquiert l'Hispanie ainsi que la Sicile où elle se heurte aux Romains.
La cité antique de Carthage est au cœur du roman Salammbô, écrit en 1862 par Gustave Flaubert, qui se déroule à l'époque d'Hamilcar Barca, c'est-à-dire lors de la jeunesse d'Hannibal Barca.

Cité romaine, vandale et byzantine
Une série de trois conflits entre les deux puissances, les guerres puniques — les Romains nomment les Carthaginois Poeni —, débutent au IIIe siècle av. J.-C. Malgré de nombreux revers et la puissance maritime et stratégique de Carthage, celle-ci perd les trois guerres consécutivement. Le cycle se termine après un siège de quatre ans avec la victoire de Rome et la destruction de Carthage en 146 av. J.-C. par les Romains dirigés par le général Scipion Émilien, petit-fils de Scipion l'Africain qui avait déjà soumis les Carthaginois en 201 av. J.-C. et allié au roi numide Massinissa (bataille de Zama).
Après une tentative avortée des Gracques, Jules César fonde par la suite une cité sur les ruines de la ville punique (Colonia Julia Carthago). Celle-ci devient la capitale de la nouvelle province d'Afrique. Au Bas-Empire, la cité, gagnée au christianisme, subit les persécutions impériales. Carthage devient, au IVe siècle, l'une des plus grandes capitales spirituelles d'Occident.
Elle est conquise en 439 par les Vandales menés par Genséric, qui y fondent un royaume. L'Église est alors victime de persécutions et particulièrement meurtrie. La reprise par les Romains (Empire romain d'Orient) en 533 ramène la prospérité à la capitale d'Afrique.
L'empereur Justinien Ier en fait le siège de son diocèse d'Afrique, mais à la suite de la crise monothélite, les empereurs de Byzance, opposés à l'Église d'Afrique, se détournent rapidement de Carthage qui devient le siège d'un exarchat. Carthage donne ensuite à Constantinople une lignée d'empereurs à la suite d'Héraclius, fils de l'exarque de Carthage.
À l'époque des conquêtes arabes, ces derniers prennent la ville en 698, mais lui préfèrent Tunis, la cité voisine, qui donne son nom au pays, celui d'Afrique désignant désormais le continent entier. À la suite de ce siège mené par Hassan Ibn Numan, la ville est mise à sac et sa population déplacée vers Tunis. Les matériaux issus de la destruction de Carthage serviront par la suite à l’expansion des infrastructures de la ville voisine.

Du Moyen Âge à l'effacement
Au Moyen Âge, Saint Louis prend la ville pendant la huitième croisade, au cours de laquelle il meurt de la dysenterie ; il espérait alors convertir le sultan hafside au christianisme et le dresser contre le souverain d'Égypte afin de forcer ce dernier à se retirer de Jérusalem. L'échec de cette stratégie marque la fin des croisades. Une cathédrale est élevée au XIXe siècle sur la colline de Byrsa, à l'endroit présumé de sa sépulture.
Jusqu'à la redécouverte de Carthage au XIXe siècle, les ruines sont pillées pour ses marbres afin de construire, en Afrique comme en Europe, des édifices publics ou religieux.
Comme lieu d'habitation, il ne reste que deux hameaux, peuplés de paysans et d'agriculteurs, situés à Douar Chott et à La Malga.

De la période beylicale à nos jours
C'est au XIXe siècle que certains hauts dignitaires de l'État beylical choisissent Carthage pour villégiature estivale. Le premier à s'y installer est Mustapha Khaznadar avec un palais à Salammbô, en bord de mer près des ports puniques, puis un autre sur les hauteurs de Byrsa, devenu une école de cadres. Ensuite, le général mamelouk Ahmed Zarrouk construit le palais Zarrouk, devenu la résidence officielle de Lamine Bey, puis un night-club après l'abolition de la monarchie, pour devenir le siège de l'Académie tunisienne des sciences, des lettres et des arts. L'influent favori de Sadok Bey, le ministre Mustapha Ben Ismaïl construit également un palais, devenu une académie de police à Douar Chott après avoir été la propriété de Hédi Bey et de ses descendants de 1882 à la confiscation du palais. Ces résidences de style tunisien s'entourent progressivement de plus petites résidences d'été appartenant aux notables et bourgeois tunisois.
Ce n'est qu'en 1906 qu'on note l'apparition des premières villas à l'européenne dont les plus importantes sont celles du secrétaire général du gouvernement tunisien, fonctionnaire colonial français et véritable Premier ministre du pays. Cette villa sera choisie par Habib Bourguiba pour devenir le palais présidentiel de Carthage en 1960. On note aussi à Salammbô, près des ports puniques, la construction vers 1930 de la villa du général Laignelot, commandant de l'armée française et ministre de la Guerre du bey, devenue la villa Terzi, de même que les villas des caïds Habib Djellouli et Salem Snadly aux abords de la colline de Byrsa. Le Corbusier réalise entre 1928 et 1929, à Carthage-Présidence, son unique œuvre tunisienne : la villa Baizeau.
La municipalité de Carthage est créée par un décret beylical le 15 juin 1919. Le développement de son périmètre communal ainsi que l'accroissement de sa population conduisent à la création de l'arrondissement municipal de Carthage-Mohamed Ali le 25 octobre 1983. En février 1985, Ugo Vetere (en) et Chedli Klibi, maires de Rome et Carthage, signent de manière symbolique le traité de Carthage, un traité de paix mettant officiellement fin à la dernière guerre ayant opposé les deux cités, la troisième guerre punique.
Depuis, Carthage est devenue une petite ville résidentielle du Grand Tunis. Elle devient un lieu de résidence recherché des hauts fonctionnaires, diplomates et industriels. La mosquée Mâlik ibn Anas est inaugurée le 11 novembre 2003 sur la colline de l'odéon après la destruction d'immeubles résidentiels datant de la période coloniale.

Architecture et urbanisme
Site archéologique
Aperçu général
Le site archéologique de Carthage, dispersé dans la ville moderne, est classé au patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco depuis 1979. Dominé par la colline de Byrsa qui était le centre de la cité punique, il se distingue par la silhouette massive de la cathédrale Saint-Louis édifiée à l'emplacement présumé de la sépulture du roi Louis IX qui y mourut au cours de la huitième croisade. Pour l'anecdote, le roi Louis-Philippe Ier, qui descend de Louis IX, envoya un architecte à Carthage pour en trouver l'emplacement le plus précis. Au vu de l'impossibilité d'une telle mission, celui-ci choisit simplement le plus bel endroit. À proximité de la cathédrale, en face de cette tombe vide dont les restes ont été rapatriés en France, se trouvent les vestiges du plus important quartier de la ville dont il ne subsiste que quelques fondations et quelques fragments de colonnes.
Forte de son héritage historique, Carthage se développe et devient une vaste banlieue résidentielle de Tunis autour du palais présidentiel. Toutefois, le développement rapide de la ville moderne risquant de détruire à jamais les vestiges, de grands archéologues tunisiens ont alerté l'opinion et l'Unesco a lancé une vaste campagne internationale entre 1972 et 1992 afin de sauver Carthage. Ce tournant est parachevé avec le classement au patrimoine mondial.
La difficulté pour le visiteur réside aujourd'hui dans l'extrême dispersion des vestiges même si certains pôles peuvent être distingués.

Éléments dispersés
Sur le sommet de la colline de Byrsa, emplacement du forum romain, a été mis au jour un quartier d'habitation punique du dernier siècle d'existence de la ville, daté plus précisément du début du IIe siècle. L'habitat est typique et même stéréotypé, avec un local sur la rue pouvant être utilisé comme magasin, une citerne étant installée au sous-sol afin de récupérer l'eau destinée à l'utilisation domestique, et un long couloir sur le côté droit qui mène à une cour percée d'un puisard et autour de laquelle se succèdent de petites pièces en nombre variable. Non loin de la mer, une zone de la ville punique a été fouillée par des archéologues allemands. Ils y ont découvert un pan du rempart qui protégeait la cité au Ve siècle av. J.-C. ainsi que tout un quartier d'habitation dont ils ont pu décrypter l'évolution durant les deux siècles précédant la destruction de 146 av. J.-C..
Le théâtre du IIe siècle a fait l'objet d'une importante restauration, les restes d'époque romaine étant très modestes. De l'édifice conçu pour accueillir 5 000 spectateurs ne subsistaient que de faibles ruines au début du XXe siècle, tant des gradins que de la scène ou du frons scænæ. À proximité du théâtre a été mise au jour une zone constituant de nos jours le parc dit des « villas romaines ». Il abrite, outre la célèbre « villa de la volière », du nom de la mosaïque principale qui la décore, de nombreux vestiges significatifs liés à la disposition des lieux.
Les nécropoles puniques qui ont fait l'objet d'une identification, d'un nombre supérieur à 3 500, sont relativement disséminées dans la ville et forment une sorte d'arc de cercle au milieu duquel se situait l'habitat. Contrairement aux nécropoles puniques, celles de l'époque romaine se trouvaient hors des limites de la cité. Les fouilles récentes ont mis en évidence plusieurs cimetières, dont celui des officiales, réservés aux fonctionnaires de l'administration proconsulaire aux abords des citernes de La Malga.

Les thermes d'Antonin furent édifiés en bord de mer après un grand incendie qui ravagea la cité au IIe siècle, plus précisément entre 145 et 162. Des installations d'origine ne demeurent que quelques vestiges du rez-de-chaussée, constitué par les espaces de service, à proximité du rivage.
De l'amphithéâtre d'une capacité de 30 000 personnes ne demeure que l'arène, le reste ayant disparu en raison des pilleurs de monuments qui ont sévi à Carthage pendant plus d'un millénaire. Un sort analogue a été réservé au cirque, ce dernier n'étant plus suggéré que par une longue dépression à proximité de Douar Chott.
Le tophet, situé non loin de deux lagunes dénommées l'une « port marchand » et l'autre « port militaire » constituant la trace des anciens ports puniques, est un enclos sacré où les Carthaginois auraient sacrifié leurs enfants aux divinités protectrices Tanit et Ba'al Hammon selon une historiographie bien ancrée, mais remise en cause par certains spécialistes, particulièrement Sabatino Moscati.

Édifices religieux contemporains
La mosquée Mâlik ibn Anas a été érigée au lieu-dit « la colline de l'odéon », sur un site d'une superficie de trois hectares.

C'est le président de la République tunisienne de l'époque, Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, qui l'a inaugurée le 11 novembre 2003. Bâtie sur une esplanade de 2 500 m2, elle comporte un minaret haut de 55 mètres et une salle de prière pouvant accueillir plus de 1 000 fidèles.
La cathédrale Saint-Louis de Carthage, située au sommet de la colline de Byrsa, est une ancienne cathédrale catholique aujourd'hui désaffectée pour le culte. L'édifice est de style byzantino-mauresque en forme de croix latine et sa façade encadrée de deux tours carrées. Aux murs figurent les blasons des donateurs pour la construction de la basilique. Les vitraux sont aussi décorés d'arabesques.
Édifiée entre 1884 et 1890, sous le protectorat français, la cathédrale devient primatiale d'Afrique lorsque le titre de primat d'Afrique est restauré au profit du cardinal Lavigerie. C'était aussi un séminaire pour les pères blancs.

Culture
Le Festival international de Carthage est un événement culturel renommé qui est organisé chaque été au théâtre antique. Les Journées cinématographiques de Carthage, festival biennal de cinéma lancé en 1966 par le ministère de la Culture tunisien, se déroulent sans interruption depuis leur création, en alternance avec les Journées théâtrales de Carthage.

Sur la colline de Byrsa, le musée national de Carthage est situé dans les locaux occupés par les pères blancs. Il permet au visiteur de se rendre compte de l'ampleur des installations de la ville aux époques punique puis romaine. Certaines des plus belles pièces trouvées dans les fouilles depuis le XIXe siècle s'y trouvent, les autres étant présentées au musée national du Bardo près de Tunis. À proximité immédiate, l'ancienne cathédrale Saint-Louis est désormais utilisée comme espace culturel et baptisée Acropolium. Elle accueille régulièrement expositions et concerts, notamment le festival Jazz à Carthage créé en 2005.
Parmi les autres institutions qui siègent à Carthage figure l'Académie tunisienne des sciences, des lettres et des arts installée depuis 1983 dans un ancien palais, propriété du général Zarrouk, ministre de la Guerre de Sadok Bey, acquis en 1922 par Habib Bey et légué à Lamine Bey, dernier représentant de la dynastie husseinite. L'Institut national des sciences et technologies de la mer, fondé en 1924, est un établissement public de recherche basé à Salammbô. Il possède un petit musée : le musée océanographique de Salammbô.
En matière d'enseignement, la ville abrite quelques établissements renommés comme l'Institut des hautes études commerciales de Carthage et l'Institut supérieur des cadres de l'enfance. Le réseau éducatif compte aussi cinq écoles et quatre lycées dont le lycée Carthage Présidence construit en 1952.

Politique
Le poste de maire est occupé depuis le 6 juillet 2018 par Hayet Bayoudh, candidate de Nidaa Tounes passée ensuite chez Tahya Tounes. Elle a sous sa responsabilité le secrétariat général et les différents services de l'administration municipale. Parmi ses prédécesseurs figurent les ministres Chedli Klibi (1963-1990) et Fouad Mebazaa (1995-1998).
L'hôtel de ville, construit au début du XXe siècle, regroupe les différents bureaux du Conseil municipal et de l'administration. Les recettes du budget municipal sont le produit de taxes sur les immeubles bâtis, les terrains non bâtis et les entreprises, la taxe hôtelière et celle sur les spectacles ainsi que les contributions des propriétaires riverains.

La Carthage moderne, outre sa vocation résidentielle, semble aussi devoir être investie d'un rôle politique de plus en plus affirmé, tant symbolique que de fait.
Carthage a accueilli un palais beylical puis, après la proclamation de la République, le lieu de résidence officielle du président de la République tunisienne ; celui-ci, construit par le président Habib Bourguiba, est situé sur le rivage, à proximité des thermes d'Antonin.
La configuration géographique de Carthage, en ancienne presqu'île, met la ville à l'abri des éventuels inconvénients et embarras de Tunis et accroît son attraction comme lieu de résidence auprès des élites. Si Carthage n'est pas la capitale, elle tend à être le pôle politique, un « lieu de pouvoir emblématique » d'après Sophie Bessis, réservant à Tunis les rôles administratifs et économiques.

Administration
La municipalité de Carthage est divisée en trois arrondissements : Carthage, Carthage Mohamed Ali et El Yasmina.

Économie
Carthage est une ville essentiellement résidentielle, donc dépourvue d'activités économiques significatives. Toutefois, le rayonnement culturel du site archéologique et le charme de certaines municipalités voisines contribuent à faire de Carthage une pièce maîtresse des circuits touristiques et un lieu d'excursion privilégié. Néanmoins, la ville est quasiment dépourvue d'infrastructures dans ce domaine ; l'absence de grandes plages, les plus proches étant situées plus au nord, en est sans doute l'une des causes.

Transport
Carthage est desservie par la ligne ferroviaire du TGM qui traverse la ville et la relie à La Goulette et Tunis au sud-ouest et Sidi Bou Saïd et La Marsa au nord. Six stations se trouvent sur son territoire : Carthage Salammbô, Carthage Byrsa, Carthage Dermech, Carthage Hannibal, Carthage Présidence et Carthage Amilcar.
Diverses lignes de bus de la Société des transports de Tunis relient la ville à d'autres points de l'agglomération comme l'Ariana et Tunis.

Sport
L'Union sportive de Carthage est un club sportif représentant la région de Carthage et connu pour ses performances en volley-ball ; le Club féminin de Carthage est son pendant féminin. Le Tennis Club de Carthage est également actif dans la ville.

Jumelages
Carthage est jumelée à quatre villes :

 Carthagène (Espagne) depuis le 10 janvier 1989
 Aix-en-Provence (France) depuis le 28 janvier 1993
 Versailles (France) depuis le 28 juin 1998
 Tyr (Liban) depuis le 20 octobre 2002

Notes et références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
Azedine Beschaouch, La légende de Carthage, Paris, Gallimard, coll. « Découvertes Gallimard / Archéologie » (no 172), 1993, 176 p. (ISBN 2-07-053212-7).
Abdelmajid Ennabli et Jacques Pérez, Carthage retrouvée, Paris, Herscher, 1995, 151 p. (ISBN 978-9973-19-055-0).
M'hamed Hassine Fantar, Carthage la cité punique, Tunis, Alif, 2007 (ISBN 978-4-03-690061-9).
Pierre Hubac, Carthage (roman historique), Paris, Éditions Marcel Daubin, coll. « La Vie dans l'histoire » (réimpr. Édition Bellenand, 1952 (BNF 32260168)), 291 p. (BNF 32260167).
Serge Lancel, Carthage, Paris, Fayard, 1992, 526 p. (ISBN 2-213-02838-9).
Daniel Rondeau, Carthage, Paris, NiL, 2008, 192 p. (ISBN 978-2-84111-392-7).
Skandar Sayedi, Carthage, 1895-1930 : à travers les cartes postales, Tunis, Alif, 2007, 150 p. (ISBN 978-9973-22-235-0).
Salah-Eddine Tlatli, La Carthage punique : étude urbaine, la ville, ses fonctions, son rayonnement, Paris, Adrien-Maisonneuve, 1978, 302 p. (ISBN 978-2-08-131468-9).
Aude de Tocqueville et Karin Doering-Froger, Atlas des cités perdues, Paris, Arthaud, 2014, 143 p. (ISBN 978-2-08-131468-9), p. 16.

Articles connexes
Civilisation carthaginoise
Guerres puniques
Archidiocèse de Carthage

Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

Site officiel.

 Portail de la Tunisie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 1,876
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Carthage
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
The ruins of Carthage (Arabic: قرطاج, Qarṭāj) are in Tunisia, 15 km north of Tunis.

## Understand
A Phoenician city from the 6th century BCE, it was the base of a powerful trading empire spanning the entire south Mediterranean and home to a population of the order of half a million people. The legendary founder, Queen Dido, bought from the locals 'as much land as a cow's skin can cover', and by cutting finely the skin of the cow, gained Byrsa Hill.
Its most famous general was Hannibal, who brought elephants across the Alps to battle with the Romans. He was defeated by the Roman general Scipio "Africanus" at the Battle of Zama in 202 BCE, which ended the 2nd Punic War. After over 50 years of being watched closely by Rome, they were eventually attacked in the 3rd Punic War. Carthage lost and the city was completely destroyed by order of the Roman Senate. The site was redeveloped by the Romans a century later and Carthage became the capital of the Roman province of Africa. Today, it is a  UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The Byrsa Hill at the rear of the area dominates both the ocean gulf and the lake and plain of Tunis inland to the west, and is therefore the most strategic point.
Today the district is very affluent, with elite schools, wealthy residents, relatively numerous police, a large number of archaeological sites and museums and the President's own seaside residence.

## Get in
Take the TGM light rail line from Tunis to one of the following stations:
36.8666210.337461 Carthage-Amilcar — only useful for the American Cemetery
36.8616710.335012 Carthage-Présidence — for the Basilica of Saint Cyprien, or a walk past the President's palace
36.8535510.328973 Carthage-Hannibal — most destinations including Antonine Baths, Roman Theatre and the hill-top Carthage Museum/Acropolium/Carthage Archaeological Park complex
36.8501110.32564 Carthage-Dermech
36.8462510.321815 Carthage-Byrsa — Oceanographic Museum, Punic Tophet and its nearby hotel
36.8418510.319146 Carthage-Salammbo

## Get around
Mostly it's best to walk.  However, the area is large and sightseeing is sweaty work on a hot day.

## By taxi
If you are tired, you may wish to get a cab between some of the major tourist spots.  This should be cheaper in low season.

## Carthage
Lots and lots of ruins! The president's palace. Sweeping views of Tunis and the gulf.
As of June 2025 you buy a ticket, costing 12 DT, which allows access to 10 different historic sites/museums, which are a big challenge to see in one day. This is now the only ticket on sale. You can’t buy tickets for individual sites. Only some sites have extensive English signage - many, such as the museum, do not. Some are not open, and most signposts pointing to where they are sketchy at best.
The most impressive sights (with better preserved ruins) are Antonin Baths and Byrsa Hill near the Carthage Museum. Amphitheater, Hill of the Odeon, and Water Cisterns are much smaller but still interesting.
36.854310.33511 Antonin Baths. Ruins of the largest Roman baths outside Rome itself. The site also has a Punic cemetery, some old houses, some Punic kilns, a chapel, some graves, and mosaics. Guides are available in a number of languages, and may be worthwhile as the site is large. It is illegal to take photographs in the direction of the presidential palace. Doing so, especially when traveling alone, may land you in jail for up to 3 years, though the guards don't appear too concerned.      (updated Nov 2018)
36.85314210.3243952 Carthage Museum. 8:30AM–5:30PM (until 7PM in the summer). Most remnants excavated from the ruins have been stored in the cavernous museum located on Byrsa Hill, documenting both the Punic and the Roman eras. Signs within the museum are entirely in Arabic and French. On the second floor, the part nearer to the staircases showcase artifacts from Roman times, and the inner part the artifacts of the earlier Punic period. Fascinating artifacts such as alabaster jars and jewelry remain. The descriptions of the Roman conquest and the legend of Dixon are also vivid, but sadly, inaccesible to English speakers. The museum grounds offer sweeping views of the coast and city, and also include the ruins of some Punic streets, the former site of a public library, numerous sculptures, a chapel or church, some excellent mosaics and some coffins. A few benches under the trees with a great view make for a good resting spot. Unfortunately many items about the grounds are unlabelled, so a guide may be useful (or eavesdrop on a tour group if you can). Ignore the shifty guy trying to charge you 1 DT to use the toilet. As of Nov 2018 visitors are allowed to access museum grounds only, while museum building is closed for reconstruction.      (updated Nov 2018)
36.85378410.3233563 Acropolium (St. Louis Cathedral). St Louis Cathedral forms one edge of the museum, but does not appear to be open - it was completed in 1890.   (updated Nov 2018)
36.8593110.3188074 Water Cisterns. A very large series of water cisterns which functioned as a water redistribution point at the terminus of a long (90 km?) aqueduct from the hills to the south. The remnants of the end of the aqueduct are still standing. Also offers reasonable views of the city. Free.    (updated Nov 2018)
36.8561210.3150785 Amphitheater. An eviscerated Roman amphitheatre constructed in the first century CE, ringed by forested, rolling hills. Interesting for a quick stroll, but it is unlabelled in any language. May therefore be more interesting with an enthusiastic guide. Worth a look. The adjacent forest may be a nice spot for a picnic. Entrance fee included in the 10-site ticket.      (updated Nov 2018)
36.8413110.322956 Punic Tophet (Salammbo Tophet), Rue Hannibal (It's the island like part that juts out into a circular bay - road signs can be misleading). A frustratingly unlabelled, but large collection of what appear to be children's grave stones. Many stones have simplistic symbols carved in to them. There are also a few half-buried structures. Guide or background reading recommended. Accessible with multi-site ticket.    (updated Nov 2018)
36.863810.3387 Basilica of Saint-Cyprien, North of Carthage Présidence Station along Route La Goulette/Rue de Rue de Maroc (Walk north a few hundred metres from the station, turn right with the sign just after the bridge and petrol station to your left.). This historic Christian temple was surrounded by a vast cemetery. Rediscovered in 1915, it was oriented toward a spectacular ocean view which can still be enjoyed. The temple is thought to have been dedicated to the well being of seafarers. All of the valuable remains have been removed, leaving the site somewhat empty. On the plus side, it makes a good picnic spot and there's a chocolate and pastry store right nearby with a service station opposite for drinks. Located very far north relative to most of the Carthaginian ruin sites, this is a good option for the start of a long day's walking. Free.    (updated Nov 2018)
36.85710.33768 Presidential Palace (Carthage Palace), Route La Goulette (Between Carthage-Hannibal and Carthage-Présidence stations, on the hill. Look for the national flags!). You can walk past the president's well-guarded palace, which includes a private boat moor and helicopter pad, on the main road. You can also see it from the Antonine Baths, and the ruins above (cross under the TGM railway bridge, then turn right up the hill). Off limits to public, but it's free to view from afar.      (updated Nov 2018)
36.858110.33089 Hill of the Odeon and park of the Roman villas. Accessible with multi-site ticket.      (updated Nov 2018)
36.850810.313710 Circus of Carthage. A Roman circus used for chariot racing, it was modeled on the Circus Maximus in Rome and other circus buildings throughout the Roman Empire. Measuring more than 470 m in length and 30 m in width, it could house up to 45,000 spectators. Not much left of it nowadays though. Free.      (updated Nov 2018)

## Other sights
36.86516810.3298611 World War II North Africa American Cemetery and Memorial (Just north of Carthage, a five-minute walk from the Amilcar Station). daily except for December 25 and January 1; 9AM-5PM. The cemetery is the final resting place for 2,841 American military Dead lost during the War in North Africa. A monument is inscribed with the names of 3,724 Americans whose remains were never found or identified. The memorial court contains large maps in mosaic and ceramic depicting operations across Africa. Free.
36.84326310.3257712 Musée Océanographique Dar El Hout (Oceanographic Museum), 28, rue du 2 mars Salammbô (Walk east toward the water from Carthage Salammbo station), then follow the lake), ☏ +216 71 730420. 10:00-13:00,15-18:00 (winter), 09:00-12:00,16:00-19:00 (summer). Built in 1924 under President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali on the site of the Carthaginian war harbour. Collection of stuffed birds and animals, several aquariums, skeletons of fossil fishes. 0.5 DT.     (updated Nov 2018)

## Do
International Festival of Carthage. In the summer is a treat with big name dancers, singers, and artists from all over the world for a very reasonable price (10.5 DT). Plastic chairs are not worth the price (26 DT) unless you are really aching for back-support. Most people bring cushions or blankets for the amphitheatre seats. Plan a late night out with concerts normally ending after 1AM.

## Buy
Other than tourist trinkets, unless you are looking for high end furniture or daily use commodities and food you may find your options limited.

## Eat
There are a number of eateries scattered around the district, though most lie outside of the major tourist trail.

## Carthage-Byrsa and Carthage-Salammbo Area
There is a restaurant-hotel with a relatively expensive but good selection (including wines) near the Punic Tophet on Rue de Hannibal south of the southerly Carthage-Byrsa station, east of Carthage-Salammbo. It's not far from the Oceanographic Museum
North of Carthage-Byrsa, two local sandwich shops can provide cheap eats and coffee.
On the main road Route La Goulette between Carthage-Byrsa and Carthage-Salammbo stations, there is a restaurant that offers a range of salads, meat dishes, sandwiches, and pizza.
36.8463710.321611 Le Rest'O, Byrsa, ☏ +216 71 733 433. Mediterranean cuisine and classy interior design. Great views of all of the city and the bay.

## Carthage-Hannibal
36.8533510.334392 Antonin Baths cafe. A small cafe on the Antonin Baths premises. Hot/cold drinks and some snacks.    (updated Dec 2018)

## Carthage-Présidence
36.86410.336663 Sale sucre (on the corner in front of the Basilica of Saint Cyprien). Doesn't operate in off-season. A tiny patisserie. Drinks can be acquired opposite at the gas station.    (updated Dec 2018)

## Drink
The hotel/restaurant on Rue de Hannibal, just south-west of the Punic Tophet, offers a wine selection, though all are Tunisian and overpriced.  Beers also appear to be available.

## Sleep
36.85239210.3230451 Villa Didon (next to the main Carthage ruins atop Byrsa Hill). This pricey hotel/spa offers food near the Carthage Museum. It features a stylish lounge and terrace with delightful views. Very pleasant for an evening beer or glass of wine, though apparently closed during off season. From 634 TN.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Go next
La Goulette
La Marsa
Sidi Bou Said - this charming town is just a few train stops from Carthage and is a great place to eat and watch the sunset
Tunis — the laid-back capital of Tunisia with a very authentic souk



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
BATHS OF ANTONINUS
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:53:15


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 337
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baths_of_Antoninus
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Baths of Antoninus or Baths of Carthage, located in Carthage, Tunisia, are the largest set of Roman thermae built on the African continent and one of three largest built in the Roman Empire. They are the largest outside mainland Italy. The baths are also the only remaining Thermae of Carthage that dates back to the Roman Empire's era. The baths were built during the reign of Roman Emperor Antoninus Pius.
After the Punics were defeated during the Third Punic War (149–146 BC), Roman traditions and customs took hold of Carthage. Carthage eventually became the third city for the allied Berber kings of the Romans. Under the control of Emperor Hadrian, the bathhouses were constructed in Carthage along the Mediterranean Sea. The bathhouses were given the name of the previous emperor, Antoninus Pius. The baths were in use until Vandals destroyed them after invading Tunisia in 439 AD. The remains of the cite are mostly in ruins, but few pieces have been preserved.
The baths are at the South-East of the archaeological site, near the presidential Carthage Palace. The archaeological excavations started during the Second World War and concluded by the creation of an archaeological park for the monument. It is also one of the most important landmarks of Tunisia. The Baths of Antoninus are structurally unique compared to other Roman bathhouses. The clay soil that bordered the Mediterranean Sea created a need for a larger foundation. The typical structure of the bathhouses had service areas in the basement, but the soft clay would not accommodate such developments. The designers had to adapt and raise the structure of this particular bath, making the Baths of Antoninus taller than other Roman bathhouses.
The baths are today part of the Archaeological site of Carthage on the list of World Heritage sites of UNESCO. On 17 February 2012, the Tunisian government proposed the Roman hydraulic complex Zaghouan-Carthage, that the baths are part of, as a future World Heritage site.

Location
See also
List of Roman public baths


== References ==



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SIDI BOU SAID
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: village
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:53:23


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 340
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sidi_Bou_Said
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sidi Bou Said (Arabic: سيدي بو سعيد ) is a town in northern Tunisia located about 20 km northeast from the capital, Tunis.
Named after a religious figure who lived there, Abu Said al-Baji, it was previously  called Jbel el-Menar. The town itself is a tourist attraction and is known for its extensive use of blue and white. It can be reached by a TGM train, which runs from Tunis to La Marsa.

History
Abu Said Ibn Khalaf Yahya al-Tamimi al-Beji arrived in  the village of Jabal el-Menar and established a sanctuary there in either the 12th or 13th century AD. After his death in 1231, he was buried there. In the 18th centur,y wealthy citizens of Tunis built residences in Sidi Bou Said.
During the 1920s, Rodolphe d'Erlanger introduced the blue-white theme to the town. His home, Ennejma Ezzahra, is now a museum that has a collection of musical instruments, and organizes concerts of classical and Arabic music.

Famous people
Sidi Bou Said has a reputation as a town of artists such as nawwarah and kassouma. Artists who have lived in or visited Sidi Bou Said include famous occultist Aleister Crowley, Paul Klee, Gustave-Henri Jossot, August Macke and Louis Moillet. Tunisian artists in Sidi Bou Said are members of École de Tunis (painting school of Tunis), such as Yahia Turki, Brahim Dhahak and Ammar Farhat. French philosopher Michel Foucault lived there for a number of years while teaching at the University of Tunis. French author Andre Gide also had a house in the town.
Former Tunisian President Beji Caid Essebsi was born in Sidi Bou Said, as was Moufida Tlatli, film director, screenwriter, and editor.
Azzedine Alaïa had a house in Sidi Bou Said which is now transformed into an art gallery.
French singer Patrick Bruel sang about Sidi Bou Said, specifically about Café des Délices, in his song Au Café des Délices in his 1999 album Juste Avant.

Gallery
References
External links

About Sidi Bou Said in general
Lexicorient (Archive copy)
 Sidi Bou Said travel guide from Wikivoyage


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,842
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sidi_Bou_Sa%C3%AFd
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sidi Bou Saïd (arabe : سيدي بو سعيد ) est un village de Tunisie situé à une vingtaine de kilomètres au nord-est de Tunis. Il compte 5 911 habitants selon le recensement de 2014.
Perché sur une falaise dominant Carthage et le golfe de Tunis, il s'élève à 130 mètres du niveau de la mer et porte le nom d'un saint musulman de la région : Sidi Bou Saïd.
Le 15 avril 2024, le gouvernement tunisien propose le village pour un futur classement sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco.

Histoire
Les Carthaginois puniques (de Mégara) puis les Romains auraient utilisé les hauteurs de l'actuel Sidi Bou Saïd pour y établir une tour à feu. Une mosaïque de six mètres sur cinq et des monnaies datant de l'époque d'Auguste prouvent d'ailleurs l'existence ancienne d'une villa romaine. Dans l'Antiquité, le village est surnommé Cap Carthagena (promontoire de Carthage).
Après la conquête arabe au VIIe siècle et la chute de Carthage, ce promontoire garde sa position stratégique par la construction d'un fortin (ribat) et d'un phare.
Au XIe siècle, Léon l'Africain décrit un « village prospère à l'arboriculture diversifiée ».
Au XIe siècle, les hauteurs du village sont choisies par les Almoravides pour la défense des côtes nord-est de la Tunisie. Des tours de guet et des tours à feu y sont construites. Elles donnent d'ailleurs l'appellation de la colline : Djebel El Manar (« Montagne du feu » ou « du phare »).
Abou Saïd Khalaf Ibn Yahya el-Tamimi el-Béji (1156-1231), alias Sidi Bou Saïd, enseigne dans la rue qu'il habite à Tunis et qui a depuis conservé son nom. Vers la fin de sa vie, il se retire sur le djebel Menara, dans le ribat construit sur la colline dominant le cap Carthage, pour monter la garde et y enseigner le soufisme. Considéré comme un soufi authentique, il est alors surnommé « maître des mers » à cause de la protection que les marins naviguant à proximité du site pensent recevoir. Il meurt en 1231 et est enterré sur la colline. Au XVIIIe siècle, Hussein Ier Bey (1705-1740) construit la mosquée actuelle où il aménage la zaouïa du saint, qui constitue sans doute le premier élément du village qui prendra son nom. Des traces archéologiques repérées sur le versant nord laissent penser qu'un mur d'enceinte contourne alors le site. De nos jours, la vénération du saint reste vivace.
Dès le XVIIe siècle, le charme de ce village séduit la bourgeoisie tunisoise et la famille beylicale husseinite qui y font construire des demeures luxueuses de style arabo-musulman telles que Dar Dellagi, Dar Mohsen, Dar Thameur, Dar Arif, Dar Lasram, Dar Debbagh, Dar Chérif, Dar Bahri, le palais Naceur Bey, etc.

Le village reçoit le nom de Sidi Bou Saïd lorsqu'il devient le siège d'une municipalité en 1893. Le 28 août 1915, un décret est pris pour assurer la protection du village, imposant le bleu de Sidi Bou Saïd et le blanc si chers au baron d'Erlanger, et interdisant toute construction anarchique sur le promontoire, faisant de Sidi Bou Saïd le premier site classé au monde.
Sidi Bou Saïd est rattaché au site de Carthage, classé patrimoine mondial par l'Unesco en 1979. Toutefois, les consignes de l'Unesco cèdent devant l'urbanisation qui se développe depuis Sidi Bou Saïd jusqu'à La Malga et Salammbô ; les connexions électriques et téléphoniques aériennes dénaturent par ailleurs le paysage. De plus, la municipalité ne parvient pas à maîtriser le développement du souk du village.
Jusqu'en 1825, le village de Sidi Bou Saïd est interdit aux non-musulmans. À partir de cette date, Sidi Bou Saïd attire nombre d'artistes, musiciens et écrivains, dont Chateaubriand, Gustave Flaubert, Paul Klee, August Macke, Alphonse de Lamartine, Georges Duhamel, Jean Duvignaud, Max-Pol Fouchet, André Gide, Colette et Simone de Beauvoir. Michel Foucault y rédige L'Archéologie du savoir.
Le 12 janvier 2013, la zaouïa de Sidi Bou Saïd est incendiée ; elle avait subi des menaces de la part de salafistes. Des travaux de restauration et d'aménagement sont entrepris par la suite.

Tourisme
Maisons
Les maisons de Sidi Bou Saïd qui combinent les architectures arabe et andalouse, extérieurement d'une blancheur éclatante et aux portes bleues, sont dispersées au hasard de ruelles tortueuses. À l'intérieur, on retrouve souvent un patio, des pièces de réception en T, de fines colonnes, des arcades et des murs de céramiques colorées disposées jusqu'au plafond. Haut-lieu touristique aux couleurs de la mer Méditerranée, classé depuis 1915, le site est surnommé le « petit paradis blanc et bleu ».
Dar Ismaïlia est offerte à une esclave du bey Hammouda Pacha, affranchie pour sa beauté légendaire, Leila Zina bent Abdallah El Genaoui. Toutefois, en 1799, Hammouda Pacha met en vente la demeure qui passe entre les mains de plusieurs familles, et appartient aujourd'hui à un diplomate artiste.

Dar El Annabi, grande demeure du mufti Mohamed Taïeb El Annabi, anciennement Dar Ennaïfer, est construite au XVIIIe siècle et remaniée en 1955. Formée d'une cinquantaine de chambres, elle est surnommée le « palais des milles et nuits ». Sa bibliothèque de grande valeur possède des ouvrages essentiellement arabisants. Elle est transformée en musée qui présente des objets et vêtements traditionnels de style arabo-musulman exposés dans différentes pièces, dont une robe de mariée qui pèse 22 kilos.
Le palais Naceur Bey, à l'origine appelé Dar Essalam, a été la propriété du cheikh Ben Achour. Sadok Bey l'offre à son neveu, Naceur Bey, qui l'agrandit pour l'adapter à ses exigences beylicales estivales.

Patrie de la musique, le village accueille également le Centre des musiques arabes et méditerranéennes dans le palais de Rodolphe d'Erlanger (1872-1932), initialement Ennejma Ezzahra (« Étoile resplendissante »), appelée aussi la « Maison du Baron ». Baron franco-britannique, peintre, musicologue, esthète à l'origine de la protection de la ville et son enrichissement musical, il contribue grandement à la notoriété du site en revalorisant l'architecture tunisienne traditionnelle. Bénéficiant d'une décoration intérieure raffinée qu'il avait dessinée et conçue lui-même et d'un jardin luxuriant dont l'aménagement est inspiré du meilleur de l'art du jardin dans les contrées de l'islam, le palais d'Erlanger est ouvert au public depuis 1992.
D'autres vastes demeures bourgeoises estivales de style arabo-musulman, et avec certaines inspirations également italiennes, sont édifiées au XIXe siècle et deviennent progressivement au XXe siècle des résidences principales : Dar Essid (rachetée en 1955 par Hédi Essid à la famille Jaafar), Dar Dellagi, Dar Thameur (de Mahmoud Bey, vendue à la famille Thameur), Dar Mohsen, Dar Toumi (devenue hôtel Dar Saïd), Dar Sfar, Dar Senoussi, Dar Chérif, Dar Bahri (construite et toujours habitée par les descendants de la famille Bahri), Dar Lasram (fondée en 1831 par le cheikh bach kateb Mohamed Lasram), Dar Khalsi, Dar Laroussi (construite en 1887 par Mhamed Laroussi puis acquise par la famille Fourati qui a tenu à préserver son cachet), Dar Arif, Dar Pace (autrefois, la demeure estivale du cheikh El Bechiri), Dar Messadek (construite en 1900), ainsi que Dar Patout.
De nouvelles demeures voient le jour plus récemment : Dar de Bochere (anciennement Dar Ben Mrad), Dar Ben Miled (reconstruite en 1965 à partir de vieilles ruines), Dar Martin, Dar Ben Abdallah (construite entre 1960 et 1970 à partir de matériaux récupérés dans certains palais détruits de la médina de Tunis, par le peintre Jellal Ben Abdallah), Dar Gherab dite aussi Dar Zembra (qui surplombe la mer), ou Dar Trabelsi (construite en 1989).
En 1973, le gouvernement américain décide la construction de son ambassade sur un monticule surplombant la baie de Carthage et le golfe de Tunis. L'entreprise est confiée à Brahim Taktak, Tunisien diplômé en Belgique, qui a pour mission d'actualiser l'architecture locale pour la rendre confortable pour accueillir de grandes réceptions.

Musée et galeries
La galerie municipale était initialement logée dans les anciennes écuries de Dar Lasram. Dans un premier temps, elle devient le musée du Baron d'Erlanger, avec une exposition permanente d'instruments de musique andalouse qu'Erlanger avait achetés en Espagne et de ses tableaux, ainsi que des collections d'objets d'art qui y ont été réunis patiemment par le concepteur du lieu et plus tard par ses héritiers. Après l'indépendance de la Tunisie, le musée se transforme en club de poterie pour les enfants puis en galerie d'exposition qui est mise à la disposition des artistes tunisiens et étrangers voulant exposer.
Outre plusieurs ateliers d'artistes, d'autres galeries jalonnent le village : la galerie Ammar-Farhat créée en 1988 par Abdelaziz Gorgi, la galerie Azzedine Alaïa logée dans son ancienne demeure ou la galerie Cherif Fine Art fondée en 1979 par Hamadi Cherif dans la maison paternelle.

Cafés
Sidi Bou Saïd est également réputé pour ses cafés dont les terrasses sont des lieux de détente très prisés des Tunisois : 

le Café Halia (ou Café des nattes) au centre du village, qui était auparavant l'entrée de la mosquée, abritait les soirées de malouf organisées par les mélomanes du village ;
le Café du Nadhour (du phare) réunit les clients venus écouter le conteur populaire (fdaoui) ;
le Café de Sidi Chaabane (ou Café des Délices), voyant le jour vers la fin des années 1960, qui offre une vue unique sur le golfe de Tunis ;
le Café de la place du village qui était le domaine réservé des anciens de Sidi Bou Saïd ;
le Café Art-Café avec une vue panoramique sur le golfe de Tunis.

Kharja
Chaque année à la mi-août se tient une fête mystique - appelée la Kharja - qui mobilise tout le village, avec des cortèges de différentes confréries religieuses venant de toute la Tunisie pour rendre hommage et demander la baraka à Sidi Bou Saïd.

Port
Autrefois, l'endroit était érigé de maisons à pilotis (barakas) possédées par les familles du village puis abandonnées ou louées dans les années 1960 à des noceurs. En 1963, la municipalité décide de les assainir et de construire un port qui accueille de nos jours plusieurs centaines d'anneaux.

Galerie
Transport
La ville de Sidi Bou Saïd est desservie par la ligne ferroviaire du TGM qui relie La Marsa à Tunis.

Personnalités liées au village
Rodolphe d'Erlanger, peintre et musicologue français, mécène amoureux du village, dont la demeure est transformée en Centre des musiques arabes et méditerranéennes ;
Azzedine Alaïa, styliste et grand couturier dont la demeure a été transformée en galerie d'art après sa mort ;
Henri Gustave Jossot, dessinateur, caricaturiste, peintre, affichiste et écrivain français mort à Sidi Bou Saïd le 7 avril 1951 ;
Hédi Turki, peintre, aquarelliste et dessinateur tunisien mort à Sidi Bou Saïd le 31 mars 2019 ;
Othman Kaak, Jellal Ben Abdallah, Rachid Koraïchi, Mahmoud Sehili et Aly Ben Salem.

Cinéma
Les scènes du marché aux esclaves dans le film Indomptable Angélique sont tournées à Sidi Bou Saïd.

Références
Bibliographie
Ashraf Azzouz et David Massey (préf. Frédéric Mitterrand), Maisons de Sidi Bou Saïd, Tunis, Dar Ashraf, 1992, 175 p. (ISBN 978-9973755025).
Slimane Mostafa Zbiss, Sidi Bou-Saïd : promontoire du soleil éternel, Tunis, Société tunisienne de diffusion, 1971, 60 p.

Articles connexes
Ain Tassat
Phare de Sidi Bou Saïd

Liens externes

Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste indicative du patrimoine mondial  

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail du tourisme


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 919
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Sidi_Bou_Said
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
The best time to visit is early autumn or spring (March-early April/late October-November), before the assault of package tourists begins, when you can still walk alone on the narrow streets, around white-blue traditional houses, enjoying the views. If you are there during the summer months, it is advisable to visit not just the jam-packed tourist main street but also the emptier inner parts of the neighbourhood. Empty in the day during Ramadan.

## Get in
It is on the Tunis - Carthage TGM light rail line (36.8705910.342081 station Sidi Bou Said).
You may drive by car. Traffic is OK. There is free parking (uphill, to the right), which may be overbooked on weekends.

## Get around
The village is quite small, and you can visit every street of the village in no more than two-three hours. On the top of the hill there is a beautiful view of the surrounding bay.

## See
The white houses with blue roofs and windows, unique to this village, perched on a hill, with an amazing view of the Mediterranean Sea and the Bay of Tunis.
36.8692610.348181 Ennejma Ezzahra. Tu-Su July&August 9:00 - 15:00, rest of the year 9:00 - 13:00, 14:00 - 17:00. former palatial home of Baron Rodolphe d'Erlanger, now a museum. 10 DT.      (updated Nov 2018)
36.8711210.347922 Family House (Dar El Annabi). An old house turned into a museum, showing the traditional life of an 18th century Tunisian lawyer. Privately owned and maintained by his descendants, it's well worth the visit. It's to your left as you enter the village. 5 DT.    (updated Dec 2018)

## Do
Sidi Bou Said has stunning whites and blues all over the village - take plenty of photos.
On the street along café des nattes, a small path on the right with many steps leads you down the hill to the seaside (36.8671110.351913 Port Plaisance), frequented by locals and seemingly unknown to tourists. A small beach, where swimming is possible, and a port with yachts that you can see from the top of the hill, with a small store and a telephone for taxis. When facing the sea, you can follow the road to your left back up to the top of the hill - a pleasant walk with a great view on the sea if it's not too hot, if you don't want to climb the stairs. Or take a taxi, they seem to stop by rather often by the beach!
Center for Arab and Mediterranean Music, 8, rue du 2 mars (in the Ennejma Ezzahra palace), ☏ +216 71 746 051. Organises concerts and events taking place at the Ennejma Ezzahra palace. (updated Nov 2018)

## Buy
Like many other Arab settlements around the world, Sidi Bou Said has a small souk year round, selling basic commodities for the locals. In addition, during tourist seasons, souvenir stalls litter the lower part of the main street of the village. A traditional product manufactured in Sidi Bou Said are bird cages, coloured in white and blue, like the roofs of the village. Don't forget to haggle.

## Mid-range
36.8709910.350031 Au Bon Vieux Temps, 56 rue Hedi Zarrouk, ☏ +216 71744733. Romantic, with great view from the terrace, but too often offering listless, bland food. Tastier food is on offer at the fresh doughnut stand nearby, on the same road. Mains are 20-45 DT.    (updated Nov 2018)
36.87190910.3412612 Coste cafe, Avenue 14 Janvier. 9:00-23:00. Coffee shop with a large outside terrace.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Splurge
36.87070610.349153 Dar Zarrouk, Rue Hedi Zarrouk. 12:30–23:00. The most upscale restaurant in town. Descent portions, tasty food, with a bit too formal atmosphere. Salads 25 DT, mains 45 DT.    (updated Nov 2018)
Taste : Sweet donuts: a kind of flour dough shaped into a ring, fried and sprinkled with sugar.

## Drink
36.87010810.3511151 Café des délices. Best view in Sidi Bou Said.  Shisha for 4 DT, but be careful, if you don't know the price the waiters will attempt to scam you for more money.  Drinks are very expensive here (5 DT per bottle of water!), essentially you are paying for the view.
36.8711510.348182 Cafe De Nattes. Famous cafe where artist Paul Klee worked often.  Located at the top of the hill from the TGM (train). Much cheaper than cafe delices and more traditional as well. Shisha for 7 DT, mint tea for 3 dinars.

## Sleep
There are a couple of places to stay in Sidi Bou Said. You can also easily find hotel rooms in nearby Tunis or Carthage. If really lucky, you might rent a room for a night or two in a house, from a village resident. However, this is rare, since the locals are quite rich and rarely have any interest in sharing their home with total strangers.
36.87135110.3459911 Hotel Sidi Bou Fares, 15 rue Sidi Bou Fares. Right in the centre of town. All rooms are based around a pretty central courtyard. They are rather small, but are en-suite. Double room rate 245 DT, but it can be haggled lower.    (updated Nov 2018)
36.8700210.352362 La Villa Bleue, 68 rue Kennedy, ☏ +216 71 742 000. Hotel by the seaside. From 600 TN.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Go next
Carthage — Phoenician colony, biggest trade metropolis of the antique world; famously razed by the Romans; remnants now encased in a museum; site easily reached by train from Tunis
La Goulette
La Marsa
Quamart - a resort on Tunisia’s Mediterranean coast
Tunis — the laid-back capital of Tunisia with a very authentic souk



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
MEDINA OF TUNIS
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: historical_district
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:53:33


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,690
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medina_of_Tunis
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Medina of Tunis is the medina quarter of Tunis, the capital of Tunisia. It has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1979.
The Medina contains some 700 monuments, including palaces, mosques, mausoleums, madrasas and fountains dating from various periods.

History
Founded in 698 around the original core of the Zitouna Mosque, the Medina of Tunis developed throughout the Middle Ages. The main axis was between the mosque and the centre of government to the west in the kasbah. To the east this same main road extended to the Bab el Bhar. Expansions to the north and south divided the main Medina into two suburbs north (Bab Souika) and south (Bab El Jazira).
Before the Almohad Caliphate, other cities such as Mahdia and Kairouan had served as capitals.  Under Almohad rule, Tunis became the capital of Ifriqiya, and under the Hafsid period it developed into a religious, intellectual and economic center.  It was during the Hafsid period that the Medina as we now know it took on its essential form. It gradually acquired a number of buildings and monuments combining the styles of Ifriqiya, Andalusian and Oriental influences, but also borrowing some of the columns and capitals of Roman and Byzantine monuments.

Social and urban structure
With an area of 270 hectares (670 acres) (plus 29 hectares (72 acres) for the district of the kasbah) and nearly 110,000 inhabitants, the Medina has one-tenth of the population of Tunis and a sixth of the urbanized area of the agglomeration.
The complex organization of the urban fabric fueled an entire colonial literature of the dangerous Medina, anarchic and chaotic, and the territory of ambush. However, since the 1930s, with the arrival of the first ethnologists, studies have revealed that the articulation of the Medina areas is not random, and houses are built according to clear sociocultural norms, codified according to complex types of human relationships. Many publications have detailed the development of the Medina model and system of prioritization of public and private spaces, residential and commercial, sacred and profane.
The urban layout of the Medina of Tunis has the distinction of not obeying geometrical layouts or formal compositions such as gridlines. Nevertheless the north-south and east-west axes are comparable to a Roman cardo and decumanus (Sidi Ben Arous, Jemaa Zitouna and Pasha Streets) that intersect at the court of Zitouna mosque, house of prayer and studies. The thoroughfares include the main streets; secondary streets and finally, small cul-de-sacs.  Sometimes entire private spots are reserved for women. The built environment is generally characterized by the juxtaposition of large plots (600 m2) and joint ownership.
The concept of public space is ambiguous in the Medina where the streets are considered as the extension of houses and subject to social tags.  The notion of individual ownership is low and displays in the souks often spill out onto the highway. This idea is reinforced by the area of a shop (about 3 m2) and bedroom (10 m2).

In the case of domestic architecture, the more a building is set back from the shops, the more it is valued. The concept of withdrawal and privacy is paramount. The late introduction of a sewer system means that much waste water still flows through the streets of the Medina. The largest houses and noble places are generally located in the district with the highest elevation, the Kasbah quarter. The roof terraces of the Medina are also an important place for social life, as illustrated by the film Halfaouine by Férid Boughedir.
Nowadays, every district retains its culture and rivalries can be strong. Thus, the northern suburb supports the football club Espérance Sportive de Tunis while the southern side is the district of the rival Club Africain. The Medina has also witnessed a social segmentation: the districts of Tourbet el Bey and the kasbah are wealthier, with a population of judges and politicians, Pasha street is the military and the bourgeoisie (merchants and notables), and smaller communities such as Hafisa where the Jewish population have traditionally lived.

Architecture
The Muradid dynasty were great builders in the Medina. Hammouda Pasha (1631–1666) was responsible for the construction of many souks in the Medina, as well as many palaces, including the Dar Hammouda Pacha and the predecessor of the modern Dar El Bey. In 1655, he had Ottoman architects build the Hammouda Pacha Mosque in the Turkish style, with an elegant octagonal minaret, below which he constructed his family mausoleum.  His son Murad II Bey (1666–1675) built the Mouradia Madrasah, dedicated to the Maliki school of Islamic law. Murad's son Mohamed Bey El Mouradi (1686–1696) built several monuments in Tunis including the (Sidi Mahrez Mosque), modelled on the mosques of Istanbul with a great central dome.
The Husainid ruler Ali II ibn Hussein (1759–1782) had the Tourbet el Bey constructed in the south of the Medina as a mausoleum for his family, It is the largest funerary monument in Tunis.
In the time of Muhammad III as-Sadiq (1859–1882) the walls of the Medina were in such bad repair that in some places they threatened to collapse. In 1865 he began demolishing them, along with a number of the Medina's historic gates: Bab Cartagena, Bab Souika, Bab Bnet and Bab El Jazira.

Domestic architecture
Dar Lasram
Dar Al Jaziri
Dar Bach Hamba
Dar Ben Ayed

Landmarks
City gates
Out of the original four gates, two are still standing, namely the Bab el Bhar in the east and the Bab Sidi Kacem as part of the Kasbah Fortress in the south-west. The other two, located at the northern entrances, were named Bab Sidi Abdallah Cherif and Bab El Allouj.

Madrasas
Since the Hafsid era, madrasas had emerged in the medina of Tunis which appeared in Arab Orient style. It was established to serve Almohads by raising workers for public services. The Hafsid sultans took care of the establishment of madrasas, and the princesses participated in this effort as well as the initiatives of the scholars and the imams in this field, and several madrasas emerged as a link to the patrons. The establishment of schools continued after the annexation of Tunisia by the Ottoman Empire, but the purpose of these madrasas had changed over time. Since 17th century when the Ottomans arrived, they employed these madrasas to spread their Hanafi maddhab. However in the 20th century, the role of these madrasas are mostly confined to accommodation of the students studying in Ez-Zitouna University.

Mosques
The Medina contains most of the great mosques of the capital, which were all built before the French protectorate.
The main Zitouna Mosque was built in 732 in the heart of the Medina and then rebuilt in 864. It was also for a long time an important place of culture and knowledge, acting as home to the Zitouna University until the independence of Tunisia. It still hosts ceremonies marking the main dates of the Muslim calendar that are regularly attended by the President of the Republic.
The Kasbah Mosque built between 1231 and 1235, was the second mosque to be built in the Medina, intended for the rulers themselves, who lived in the nearby Kasbah. It is distinguished especially by the dome in stalactites preceding the mihrab and by its minaret that recalls that of the Koutoubia of Marrakech and is the highest in the Medina.
The Ksar Mosque of the Hanafi rite, located opposite the Dar Hussein (Bab Menara), was built in the 12th century under the Khurasanid dynasty.
The Youssef Dey Mosque functioned first as an oratory before becoming a mosque in 1631, and is the first mosque of the Ottoman-Turkish period. The Hammouda-Pacha mosque, built in 1655, was the second mosque of the Hanefite rite built in Tunis while the Sidi Mahrez mosque is the largest mosque of this type in the country. Built from 1692 to 1697, it is Ottoman-inspired and recalls some Istanbul mosques such as the Blue Mosque (erected between 1609 and 1616) and the Yeni Valide (completed in 1663). The El Jedid Mosque, built by the founder of the Hussein dynasty Hussein the Ist Bey between 1723 and 1727, has, like the Youssef Dey and Hammouda-Pacha mosques, an Ottoman-inspired octagonal minaret.
The Saheb Ettabaâ Mosque, built between 1808 and 1814, is the last mosque constructed in Tunis by the Husseinites before the French occupation.

Palaces
The palaces or the Dars are one of the most important historical monuments in the ancient city of Tunis, which were inhabited by politicians, wealthy class and dignitaries of the city.

Climate change
As a coastal heritage site, Medina of Tunis is vulnerable to sea level rise. In 2022, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report included it in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with the warming of over 4 °C., and is no longer considered very likely. The other, more plausible scenarios result in lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet, sea levels would continue to increase for about 10,000 years under all of them. Even if the warming is limited to 1.5 °C, global sea level rise is still expected to exceed 2–3 m (7–10 ft) after 2000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger increases by then), consequently exceeding 2100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~0.75 m (2 ft) with a range of 0.5–1 m (2–3 ft)) well before the year 4000. This means that unless effective adaptation efforts such as sea walls can be constructed to deal with the sea level rise, damage and the potential destruction of Medina of Tunis is a matter of time.

See also
Religion in Tunisia
Sainte-Croix Church of Tunis, a former church building
Sidi Abdallah Cherif Mausoleum
Moorish architecture
Hara, the former Jewish quarter of the Medina of Tunis

References
External links
Association pour la sauvegarde de la medina de Tunis (in French)
UNESCO site on the Tunis Medina
the Hafsia quarter of the medina of Tunis
the former Jewish quarter (hara) of the medina



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ZAYTUNA MOSQUE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: religious_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:53:41


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,688
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Zaytuna_Mosque
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Al-Zaytuna Mosque, also known as Ez-Zitouna Mosque, and El-Zituna Mosque (Arabic: جامع الزيتونة, romanized: Jāmiʿ al-Zaytūnah, lit. 'Mosque of the olive'), is a major mosque at the center of the Medina of Tunis in Tunis, Tunisia. The mosque is the oldest in the city and covers an area of 5,000 square metres (1.2 acres) with nine entrances. It was founded at the end of the 7th century or in the early 8th century, but its current architectural form dates from a reconstruction in the 9th century, including many antique columns reused from Carthage, and from later additions and restorations over the centuries. 
The mosque developed into a place of higher education, today the University of Ez-Zitouna, which became the most important educational institution in Tunisia from around the 13th century onward. Ibn 'Arafa, a major Maliki scholar, al-Maziri, the great traditionalist and jurist, and Aboul-Qacem Echebbi, a famous Tunisian poet, all taught there, among others.

Etymology
One legend states that it was called "Mosque of Olive" because it was built on an ancient place of worship where there was an olive. Another account, transmitted by the 17th century Tunisian historian Ibn Abi Dinar, reports the presence of a Byzantine Christian church dedicated to Santa Olivia at that location. Archeological investigations and restoration works in 1969–1970 have shown that the mosque was built over an existing Byzantine-era building with columns, covering a cemetery. This may have been a Christian basilica, which provides support for the legend reported by Ibn Abi Dinar. A more recent interpretation by Muhammad al-Badji Ibn Mami suggests that the previous structures may have been part of a Byzantine fortification, inside which the Arab conquerors built their mosque. This hypothesis is also supported by Sihem Lamine.
The saint is particularly venerated in Tunisia because it is superstitiously thought that if the site and its memory are profaned then a misfortune will happen; this includes a belief that when her relics are recovered Islam will end. This ancillary legend related to the discovery of the saint's relics is widespread in Sicily, however it is connected to other Saints as well. In 1402 king Martin I of Sicily requested the return of Saint Olivia's relics from the Berber Caliph of Ifriqiya Abu Faris Abd al-Aziz II, who refused him. Even today the Tunisians, who still venerate her, believe that the dominion of their religion will fade when the body of the Virgin Olivia will disappear.

History
Foundation
Al-Zaytuna was the second mosque to be built in Ifriqiya and the Maghreb region after the Mosque of Uqba in Kairouan. The exact date of building varies according to different sources and interpretations. The 11th-century writer Al-Bakri wrote that Ubayd Allah ibn al-Habhab, the Umayyad governor of Ifriqiya, built a Friday mosque (jāmīʿ) in Tunis in 114 AH (732/733 CE). Ibn Khaldun (d. 1406) also repeats this account. However, al-Bakri also mentions a mosque (masjid) being built by Hasan ibn al-Nu'man, who led the conquest of Carthage, in 79 AH (698/699 CE). 
Modern historians have been divided over the exact date of construction and on whether it should be attributed to Ibn al-Habhab or to Ibn al-Nu'man. Most scholars support the second explanation and attribute the foundation to Ibn al-Nu'man in 698 CE. Under this explanation, it is assumed that Ibn al-Habhab subsequently rebuilt it, expanded it, or completed its construction. One supporting argument is that it is unlikely the city of Tunis remained a long time without a mosque after its conquest in 79 AH (698/699CE). Ahmed ibn Abu Diyaf, a 19th-century Tunisian historian, attributes the foundation to Hasan ibn al-Nu'man in 84 AH (703/704CE). Lucien Golvin, a 20th-century French scholar, argued that Ibn al-Habhab was the founder but that the construction took place in 116 AH (734/735CE).

Aghlabid reconstruction
The mosque owes its current overall form to a reconstruction under the Aghlabids, the dynasty that ruled Ifriqiya on behalf of the Abbasid caliphs in the 9th century. The work was begun during the reign of emir Abu Ibrahim Ahmad and completed in 864–865. As a result, the mosque's layout is also very similar to the Mosque of Uqba in Kairouan, which was also rebuilt by the Aghlabids earlier in the same century. A contemporary inscription at the base of the dome in front of the mihrab gives the date of this construction and names three individuals: 1) the Abbasid caliph al-Musta'in Billah, identified as the main patron; 2) Nusayr, a mawla of the caliph and probably the overseer of the works; and 3) Fathallah or Fath al-Banna', the architect and chief builder. Another inscription, along one of the mosque's courtyard façades, provides the same information. The Aghlabid emir himself (Abu Ibrahim Ahmad) is not mentioned in these inscriptions, suggesting that he may not have been officially involved in the construction and that Nusayr was directing the works directly on behalf of the Abbasid caliph instead. 
The Aghlabid structure, in turn, is mostly obscured today by later additions and reconstructions. The sections that are best preserved from the 9th century are the interior of the prayer hall (though some of this was later rebuilt too) and the projecting round corner bastions at the northern and eastern corners of the mosque. There is no evidence that a minaret was attached to the mosque at this time. The reasons for this omission are unclear. It suggests that minarets were not yet a standard feature of congregational mosques or that they were still considered a controversial innovation at the time.

Later history
Between 990 and 995 further works were carried out under the Zirids, clients of the Fatimid caliphs. These works included the addition of galleries around the courtyard and the Qubbat al-Bahu (or Qubbat al-Bahw), the dome at the entrance of the prayer hall. The dome itself is dated more specifically to 991. The dates for these works are provided by a series of inscriptions around the Qubbat al-Bahu, but the names of the patrons themselves were erased at a later period, possibly when the Zirids declared independence from the Fatimids in the 11th century. From context, the works can be attributed to the patronage of the Zirid emir Al-Mansur ibn Buluggin. The inscriptions also provide the names of four craftsmen: Ahmad al-Burjini, Abu al-Thana, 'Abdallah ibn Qaffas, and Bishr ibn al-Burjini.

Under the Hafsids, who ruled during the 13th to 15th centuries, Tunis became the main capital of Ifriqiya for the first time. This led to an increase in the Zaytuna Mosque's importance and allowed it to overtake the prestige of the older Mosque of Uqba in Kairouan. Significant restoration work was carried out by the Hafsid rulers, under al-Mustansir in 1250 and under Abu Yahya Zakariya in the early 14th century, adding features such as ablution facilities and replacing some of the woodwork. Other repairs and restorations were carried at multiple points during this era. The mosque's first attested minaret was also built under Hafsid patronage in 1438–1439. Its appearance is known from old photographs: it had a cuboid shape (having a shaft with a square base) and was crowned with an arcaded gallery and a polygonal turret or lantern at its summit. 

In 1534 Spanish forces occupied Tunis and broke into the mosque, raiding its libraries and destroying or dispersing many of its manuscripts. During the Ottoman period, both the Muradid and Husaynid dynasties restored and expanded the mosque and its associated institutions. This helped restore the mosque's prominence and its prestige as a center of learning. In 1637 an arcaded loggia was added to the mosque's exterior eastern façade by a patron named Muhammad al-Andalus ibn Ghalib, whose name suggests he was one of the moriscos expelled from Spain in 1609. From 1624 to 1812 the local Bakri family took charge of the mosque's care and occupied the position of the mosque's imam. The present-day minaret was entirely rebuilt in 1894 and imitates the Almohad style of the Kasbah Mosque's minaret further west. Tunisian presidents Bourguiba and Ben Ali carried out major restoration work and rehabilitation, especially during the 1960s and 1990s.

Scholarship and the University
There is little information about teaching at the Zaytuna Mosque prior to the 14th century. During this time there were most likely courses being offered voluntarily by ulama (Islamic legal scholars), but not in an organized manner. For centuries, Kairouan was the early centre of learning and intellectual pursuits in Tunisia and North Africa in general. Starting from the 13th century, Tunis became the capital of Ifriqiya under Almohad and Hafsid rule. This shift in power helped al-Zaytuna to flourish and become one of the major centres of Islamic learning, and Ibn Khaldun, the first social historian in history was one of its products. The flourishing university attracted students and men of learning from all parts of the known world at the time. Along with disciplines theology – such as exegesis of the Qur'an (tafsir) – the university taught fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence), Arabic grammar, history, science and medicine. It also had a kuttab or elementary school that taught youth how to read, write, and memorize religious texts. The system of teaching was not rigid: attendance was not mandatory and students could follow the courses of their choice. Students who followed a course and became knowledgeable enough to teach the subject on their own were granted a certificate called an ijazah by their instructor.
Rich libraries were also attached to the university. The manuscripts covered almost all subjects and sciences, including grammar, logic, documentations, etiquette of research, cosmology, arithmetic, geometry, minerals, vocational training, etc. One of its famous libraries, al-Abdaliyah, included a large collection of rare manuscripts that attracted scholars from abroad. Much of the library's original collection was dispersed or destroyed when the Spanish occupied Tunis and broke into the Zaytuna Mosque in 1534. After Tunisia gained independence from France in the 1950s the university's library was integrated into the National Libraries of Tunis.
The start of Ottoman rule in 1574 initially brought a decline in teaching, but this quickly recovered. The institution received greater attention and political patronage in the 18th century. By this time, however, the teaching of non-religious subjects had significantly declined. Administrative and curricular reforms to the institution were begun by Ahmad Bey in 1842. They continued in 1875 under Prime Minister Khayr al-Din al-Tunisi, who also expanded the al-Abdaliyah Library and opened it to the public. In 1896 new courses were introduced such as physics, political economy, and French, and in 1912 these reforms were extended to the university's other branches in Kairouan, Sousse, Tozeur, and Gafsa. Until the 20th century the students were mostly recruited from Tunisia's wealthiest families but afterwards its recruitment broadened. Under French colonial rule it turned into a bastion of Arab and Islamic culture resisting French influence. Some prominent members of the Algerian nationalist movement studied here, such as 'Abd al-Hamid ibn Badis, Tawfiq Madani, and Houari Boumédiène. 
After independence from France, reforms to the education system in 1958 and the creation of the University of Tunis in 1960 reduced the Zaytuna's importance. In 1964–1965 its status as an independent university was abolished by President Habib Bourguiba and it was relegated to being a theological college for the University of Tunis. For years afterward, under the rule of both Bourguiba and his successor Ben Ali, the Zaytuna educational institution was kept officially and physically distinct from the Zaytuna Mosque itself. In 2012, after the Tunisian revolution and in response to a court petition by a group of Tunisian citizens, the mosque's former educational offices were reopened and it was declared an independent educational institution once again.

Architecture
General layout
The al-Zaytuna Mosque followed the design and architecture of previous mosques, particularly the Mosque of Uqba in Kairouan that was built in its current form a few decades earlier. The layout of the building and its interior is irregular, with many of its lines not quite parallel or perpendicular, but this is not perceptible to a visitor. The building consists primarily of a trapezoidal courtyard (sahn) and a hypostyle prayer hall. The main difference between this mosque and the Kairouan mosque is the position of the minaret, which in this case was added at a much later period. 
The mosque is closely integrated into the urban fabric and most of the building's exterior is concealed by other neighbouring structures. Only on the eastern side of the mosque is an external façade, fronted by an arcaded loggia from 1637. The adjoining rooms and structures around the rest of the mosque's perimeter include shops, libraries, and maqsuras (areas reserved for specific individuals or groups during prayer).

Courtyard and minaret
The courtyard is accessible from the exterior via seven doorways and is surrounded by galleries supported by arcades of arches and columns. The gallery on the southern side, preceding the prayer hall, dates from the 10th-century Zirid restoration and is supported by spoliated antique columns and capitals, while the three other galleries currently date from the 17th and 19th centuries, with columns imported from Italy by the prime minister Mustapha Khaznadar in the mid-19th century. The pavement of the courtyard itself consists of antique marble plaques, also spolia. 

The square minaret rises from the northwest corner of the courtyard. Built in 1894, the minaret is 43 meters (141 ft) high and imitates the decoration of the Almohad-style minaret of the Kasbah Mosque with its limestone strap-work in a sebka pattern on a background of ochre sandstone.

Prayer hall
The central entrance to the prayer hall is covered by a dome, the Qubbat al-Bahu, added by the Zirids around 991. Measuring about 12 metres in height and 4 metres in width, the dome has a sophisticated construction and Jonathan Bloom describes it is one of the finest architectural works from this period of western Islamic architecture. The dome is ribbed and rests on an octagonal base, which rests in turn on a square supporting structure. The ornamentation includes carved moldings, decorative blind arches and niches, pilasters, and polychrome mosaic or ablaq stonework in red, white, and black stone. The arches and windows have horseshoe arches and voussoirs of alternating white and red stone. Arabic inscriptions in Fatimid floriated Kufic are found around the base of the dome and above the capitals of some of the columns.
The hypostyle prayer hall is divided into 15 aisles by rows of columns, 6 bays long, supporting horseshoe arches running perpendicular to the southeastern qibla wall. Each aisle is about 3 metres wide but the central aisle, leading to the mihrab (niche symbolizing the qibla), is wider than the others at 4.8 metres. Another transverse aisle runs in front of the qibla wall. There are around 160 columns and most of them are antique spolia, most likely taken from the site of Carthage. The space in front of the mihrab is covered by a well-preserved dome from the Aghlabid period (9th century), with Kufic inscriptions from the same period. A few carved stucco panels along the upper walls of the central aisle, probably former windows, still date from the Aghlabid period. 
The mihrab itself was redecorated in later periods and most of the prayer hall's decoration, apart from the antique columns, dates from the 13th century onward. The stucco decoration around the mihrab dates largely from 1638, and the stuccowork on the imposts of the columns dates from 1820. Inside the mihrab is a marble plaque covered in gold leaf and carved with an Aghlabid Kufic inscription with religious formulas such as the shahada. 
The minbar (pulpit) next to the mihrab is one of the oldest existing minbars after the minbar of Kairouan, though only some of its side panels are still originals from the Aghlabid period, with the others dating from later renovations. The latest pieces date from 1583 in the early Ottoman period. The minbar is smaller than the Kairouan minbar, measuring 2.53 by 3.30 metres. The wooden panels are carved with a variety of geometric and stylized vegetal motifs.

See also
Islam in Tunisia
List of mosques in Tunisia
List of the oldest mosques in the world

References
External links
 Media related to Zaytuna Mosque at Wikimedia Commons



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
BARDO NATIONAL MUSEUM
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: museum
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:53:49


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 23
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bardo_National_Museum
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bardo National Museum or Musée National du Bardo may refer to:

Bardo National Museum (Algiers) in Algeria
Bardo National Museum (Tunis) in Tunisia



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
KAIROUAN
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:54:05


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,699
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kairouan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kairouan (UK: , US: ), also spelled El Qayrawān or Kairwan (Arabic: ٱلْقَيْرَوَان, romanized: al-Qayrawān [æl qɑjrɑˈwæːn] , Tunisian Arabic: Qeirwān [qɪrˈwɛːn] ), is the capital of the Kairouan Governorate in Tunisia and a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city was founded by the Umayyads around 670, in the period of Caliph Mu'awiya (reigned 661–680); this is when it became an important centre for Sunni Islamic scholarship and Quranic learning, attracting Muslims from various parts of the world. The Mosque of Uqba is situated in the city.

Etymology
The name (ٱلْقَيْرَوَان al-Qayrawān) is an Arabic word meaning "military group" or "caravan", borrowed early on from the Middle Persian word kārawān (modern Persian کاروان kârvân), meaning "military column" (kâr "people/military" + vân "outpost") or "caravan" (see caravanserai). In Berber, the city used to be called تيكيروان Tikirwan, thought to be an adaptation of the Arabic name. It has also been romanized as Cairoan in early modern English.

History
Foundation and early Islamic period
The foundation of Kairouan dates to about the year 670 when the Arab general Uqba ibn Nafi of Caliph Mu'awiya selected a site in the middle of a dense forest, then infested with wild beasts and reptiles, as the location of a military post for the conquest of the West. Formerly, the city of Kamounia was located where Kairouan now stands. It had housed a Byzantine garrison before the Arab conquest, and stood far from the sea – safe from the continued attacks of the Berbers who had fiercely resisted the Arab invasion. Berber resistance continued, led first by Kusaila, whose troops killed Uqba at Biskra about fifteen years after the establishment of the military post, and then by a Berber woman called Al-Kahina who was killed and her army defeated in 702. Subsequently, there occurred a mass conversion of the Berbers to Islam. Kharijites or Islamic "outsiders" who formed an egalitarian and puritanical sect appeared and are still present on the island of Djerba.
In October 741, in the course of the Great Berber Revolt in the Maghreb, the Ifriqiyan army, along with a Syrian force dispatched by the caliph, was destroyed by the Berbers at the Battle of Bagdoura. The governor Kulthum ibn Iyad al-Qasi perished in the field, his nephew and successor Balj ibn Bishr al-Qushayri was holed up with the remnant of the army in Spain, leaving the whole of Ifriqiya open to the advance of the Berber rebels. Not having any more forces at his disposal, the Umayyad Caliph Hisham quickly appointed Handhala ibn Safwan as governor of Ifriqiya, with supervisory authority over all the Maghreb (North Africa west of Egypt) and al-Andalus (Spain), and instructed him to take whatever forces he could gather to defend Ifriqiya and quash the Berber rebellion. Leaving Egypt in the hand of Hafs ibn al-Walid ibn Yusuf al-Hadrami, Handhala set out westwards in February 742, picking up additional forces from Barqa (Cyrenaica) and Tripoli (Tripolitana). He arrived in Kairouan around April, 742. The qadi of Ifriqiya, Abd al-Rahman ibn Oqba al-Ghaffari, had been managing the defense of Kairouan, and succeeded in fending off an attack by the Berber rebel army raised in southern Tunisia by the Sufrite leader Oqasha ibn Ayub al-Fezari. Handhala ibn Safwan arrived in Kairouan just as Oqasha was said to be mounting a new attack, in coordination with another large Berber army coming in from the west, led by Abd al-Wahid ibn Yazid al-Hawwari. The Berber rebel armies were to make junction in front of Kairouan, before launching their final attack on the city. Wasting no time, Handhala dispatched a cavalry force to slow down Abd al-Wahid's progress, and threw the bulk of his forces south, defeating Oqasha in a bloody battle at El-Qarn and taking him prisoner. But Handhala had taken a lot of losses himself, and now faced the unhappy prospect of Abd al-Wahid's gigantic army, said to be some 300,000, ostensibly the largest Berber army ever seen. Hurrying back, Handhala is said to have put the entire population of Kairouan under arms to bolster his ranks, before setting out again. In perhaps the bloodiest encounter in the Berber wars, Handhala ibn Safwan defeated the great Berber army of Abd al-Wahid ibn Yazid at al-Asnam in May 742 (perhaps a little later), just three miles outside of Kairouan. Some 120,000–180,000 Berbers, including Abd al-Wahid, fell in the field of battle in that single encounter.

Aghlabid period
In 745, Kharijite Berbers captured Kairouan, which was already at that time a developed city with luxuriant gardens and olive groves. Power struggles continued until Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab recaptured Kairouan at the end of the 8th century.

In 800 Caliph Harun ar-Rashid in Baghdad confirmed Ibrahim as emir and hereditary ruler of Ifriqiya. Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab founded the Aghlabid dynasty which ruled Ifriqiya between 800 and 909. The new emirs embellished Kairouan and made it their capital. It soon became famous for its wealth and prosperity, reaching the levels of Basra and Kufa and giving Tunisia a period of power and prosperity.
The Aghlabids built the great mosque and established in it a university that was a centre of education both in Islamic thought and in the secular sciences. Its role can be compared to that of the University of Paris in the Middle Ages. In the 9th century, the city became a brilliant focus of Arab and Islamic cultures attracting scholars from all over the Islamic World. In that period Imam Sahnun and Asad ibn al-Furat made of Kairouan a temple of knowledge and a magnificent centre of diffusion of Islamic sciences. The Aghlabids also built palaces, fortifications and fine waterworks of which only the pools remain. From Kairouan envoys from Charlemagne and the Holy Roman Empire returned with glowing reports of the Aghlabid palaces, libraries and gardens – and from the crippling taxation imposed to pay for their drunkenness and sundry debaucheries. The Aghlabids also pacified the country and conquered Sicily in 827.

Fatimid and Zirid period
In 893, through the mission of Abdullah al Mahdi, the Kutama Berbers from the west of the country started the movement of the Shiite Fatimids. The year 909 saw the overthrow of the Sunni Aghlabids who ruled Ifriqiya and the establishment of the Fatimid dynasty. During the rule of the Fatimids, Kairouan was neglected and lost its importance: the new rulers resided first in Raqqada but soon moved their capital to the newly built Al Mahdiyah on the eastern coast of Tunisia. After succeeding in extending their rule over all of central Maghreb, an area consisting of the modern countries of Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Libya, they eventually moved east to Egypt to found Cairo making it the capital of their vast Caliphate and leaving the Zirids as their vassals in Ifriqiya. Governing again from Kairouan, the Zirids led the country through another artistic, commercial and agricultural heyday. Schools and universities flourished, overseas trade in local manufactures and farm produce ran high and the courts of the Zirids rulers were centres of refinement that eclipsed those of their European contemporaries. When the Zirids declared their independence from Cairo and their conversion to Sunni Islam in 1045 by giving allegiance to Baghdad, the Fatimid Caliph Ma'ad al-Mustansir Billah sent as punishment hordes of troublesome Arab tribes (Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym) to invade Ifriqiya. These invaders so utterly captured Kairouan from the Zirids in 1057 and destroyed it that it never regained its former importance and their influx was a major factor in the spread of nomadism in areas where agriculture had previously been dominant. Some 1,700 years of intermittent but continual progress was undone within a decade as in most part of the country the land was laid to waste for nearly two centuries.

Later history
Al-Idrisi described the city in the 12th century:The city of Kairouan is the mother of settlements and the capital of regions. It was once the greatest city of the West in its expanse, the most populous, the wealthiest, the most prosperous, the most finely built, and the most ambitious, with the most profitable trade, the highest tax revenues, the most flourishing markets, and the greatest commercial gains, while its people were also the most rebellious and the most arrogant of the ignorant, yet among its virtuous elite, the dominant qualities were adherence to righteousness, fulfillment of covenants, avoidance of doubtful matters, abstention from prohibitions, mastery of refined sciences, and an inclination toward moderation. But God Almighty afflicted it with the Arabs, and calamities befell it one after another, until nothing remained of it but fading ruins and obliterated traces. In our present time, only a portion of it is enclosed by an earthen wall. Its rulers are Arabs, who collect whatever revenues remain. A few people still reside there, engaged in modest trade with meager benefits. Scholars speculate that it will soon return to its former state of prosperity and grandeur. Its water supply is scarce, and its inhabitants drink from the great cistern (majel) within the city. This cistern is an architectural marvel, as it is built in a square shape with a tower-like structure rising in the center. Each side measures two hundred cubits, and it remains filled with water. Kairouan was originally two cities: one was Kairouan itself, and the other was Sabra. Sabra was the royal residence, and at the height of its prosperity, it contained three hundred baths—most of them private, while the rest were public for all people. Sabra, however, is now in complete ruin, devoid of any inhabitants.
In the 13th century under the prosperous Hafsids dynasty that ruled Ifriqiya, the city started to emerge from its ruins. It is only under the Husainid Dynasty that Kairouan started to find an honorable place in the country and throughout the Islamic world.
In 1881, Kairouan was taken by the French, after which non-Muslims were allowed access to the city. The French built the 600 mm (1 ft 11+5⁄8 in) Sousse–Kairouan Decauville railway, which operated from 1882 to 1996, before it was regauged to 1,000 mm (3 ft 3+3⁄8 in) gauge.
The old city of Kairouan and its associated historic monuments became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1988.
In December 2023, about 30m of wall near the Gate of the Leather Workers collapsed during restoration. Three masons were killed, and several others injured.

Geography
Location
Kairouan, the capital of Kairouan Governorate, lies south of Sousse, 50 km (31 mi) from the east coast, 75 km (47 mi) from Monastir and 184 km (114 mi) from Tunis.

Climate
Kairouan has a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification BSh).

Demographics
In 2014, the city had about 187,000 inhabitants.

Religion
Between the 9th and 11th centuries AD, Kairouan functioned as one of the great centers of Islamic civilization and gained a reputation as a hotbed of scholarship across the entire Maghreb. During this period, the Great Mosque of Kairouan became both a place of prayer and a center for teaching Islamic sciences under the Maliki current. A unique religious tradition practiced in Kairouan was the use of Islamic law to enforce monogamy by stipulating it in the marriage contract. Local tradition holds that seven pilgrimages to the Great Mosque equals one pilgrimage to Mecca. According to some, this makes Kairouan the fourth holiest city in Islam after Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem. As of 2004, the city contained 89 mosques. Sufi festivals are held in the city in memory of saints.
Before the arrival of the French in 1881, non-Muslims were forbidden from living in Kairouan. A Christian community had existed during the early 11th century alongside Jews who were among the original settlers of Kairouan. The Jewish community's golden era began in the late 8th century and lasted until the early 11th century during which time it played an important role in Jewish history, having been a world center of Talmudic and Halakhic scholarship for at least three generations. The Banu Hilal conquest of Kairouan in 1057 led to the decline of the medieval community with Jews only returning after Tunisia was established as a French protectorate in 1881. By the 1960s the community had disappeared, and all that remains is their dilapidated cemetery.

Main sights
Great Mosque of Kairouan
The city's main landmark is the Great Mosque of Sidi-Uqba (also known as the Great Mosque of Kairouan) which is one of the most impressive and largest Islamic monuments in North Africa. Originally built when Kairouan was founded in 670 AD, the mosque currently occupies an area of over 9,000 square metres (97,000 sq ft) and is one of the oldest places of worship in the Islamic world. The mosque became a center of education both in Islamic thought and in the secular sciences and helped the city to develop and expand.

Mosque of the Three Doors
The Mosque of the Three Doors was founded in 866. Its façade is a notable example of Islamic architecture. It has three arched doorways surmounted by three inscriptions in Kufic script, interspersed with floral and geometrical reliefs and topped by a carved frieze; the first inscription includes the verses 70–71 in the sura 33 of Quran. The small minaret was added during the restoration works held under the Hafsid dynasty. The prayer hall has a nave and two aisles, divided by arched columns, parallel to the qibla wall.

Mosque of the Barber
The Zawiya of Sidi Sahib, also known as the Mosque of the Barber, is a religious complex containing the mausoleum of Abu Zama' al-Balawi, a companion of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, who, according to legend, had saved for himself three hairs of Muhammad's beard, hence the edifice's name. The complex was first built up in the 14th century under the Hafsids, but in its present state it dates from the 17th century, under the Muradids. The tomb chamber is accessed from a cloister-like court with rich tile and stucco decoration. In addition to the mausoleum, the complex includes a madrasa and several other facilities.

Aghlabid basins
The Aghlabid basins are a Tunisian historical monument located in Kairouan. Dating from the 9th century and located outside the ramparts of the medina of Kairouan, they are considered to be the most important hydraulic systems in the history of the Muslim world. The structure covers an area of 11,000 square meters and consists of a small settling basin, a large basin for storing water and two drawing tanks, all having a total storage capacity of 68,800 cubic meters.

Economy
The primary economic sectors in Kairouan are industry, agriculture and tourism.

Industry
The Kairouan region currently has 167 industrial companies offering more than 10,000 jobs, of which 33 are fully exporters.
The industrial activities of the region are quite diversified, although the agrifood industry sector is preeminent with 91 units.

Agriculture
The governorate of Kairouan is known mainly for the production of vegetables (peppers, tomatoes) and fruits (apricots, almonds and olives). It is the leading national producer of chili peppers with nearly 90,000 tonnes in 2019, as well as apricots with more than 15,000 tonnes.

Tourism
Kairouan is one of the four most visited sites in Tunisia along with Carthage, El Jem and Le Bardo as historic sites. Tourist activity is focused on the historic sites and monuments of the city of Kairouan.

Food
Kairouan is known for its pastries (e.g. zlebia and makroudh).

In popular culture
Kairouan was used as a filming location for the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark, standing in for Cairo. As the film is set in 1936, television antennas throughout the city were taken down for the duration of filming.

Notable people
Su'da – historically attested Berber princess supposedly died there.
Najla Bouden – 17th Prime Minister of Tunisia (first female prime minister in the Arab world).
Habib Galhia, boxer
Habiba Ghribi, athlete
Fatima al-Fihriya, founder of the first university in the world.
Salih al-Souissi al-Qayrawani (1871–1941), writer and activist

Twin towns
Gallery
See also
Kairouan's significance in Islam
List of mosques in Kairouan

Notes
References
External links

Official website
Kairouan, tourismtunisia.com
Kairouan World heritage Site, whc.unesco.org
Kairouan University
Al-Qayrawan, muslimheritage.com
Kairwan, jewishencyclopedia.com
WorldStatesmen-Tunisia
KAIROUAN, The Capital of Islamic Culture 
Panoramic virtual tour of Kairouan medina Archived 30 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 2,793
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%82%D9%8A%D8%B1%D9%88%D8%A7%D9%86
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

القَيْرَوَان ( أو )، مدينة تونسية، تبعد حوالي 160 كيلومتر عن تونس العاصمة والقيروان المعروفة بعاصمة الأغالبة هي أول المدن الإسلامية المشيدة في بلاد المغرب وكان لها دور استراتيجي في الفتح الإسلامي، انطلقت منها حملات الفتح نحو الجزائر والمغرب وإسبانيا وأفريقيا بالإضافة إلى أنها رقاد لعدد من صحابة رسول الله محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم ويطلق عليها الفقهاء «رابعة الثلاث،» بعد مكة والمدينة المنورة والقدس وفي هذه المدينة توجد أهم المعالم للقيروان، منها جامع القيروان الكبير و الذي أسسه عقبة بن نافع.

تاريخ القيروان
يعود تاريخ القيروان إلى عام 50 هـ / 670 م، عندما قام بإنشائها عقبة بن نافع. وكان هدفه من هذا البناء أن يستقر به المسلمون، إذ كان يخشى إن رجع المسلمون عن أهل إفريقية أن يعودوا إلى دينهم. وتعتبر القيروان من أقدم وأهم المدن الإسلامية، بل هي المدينة الإسلامية الأولى في منطقة المغرب الإسلامي ويعتبر إنشاء مدينة القيروان بداية تاريخ الحضارة العربية الإسلامية في المغرب العربي، فلقد كانت مدينة القيروان تلعب دورين هامين في آن واحد، هما: الجهاد والدعوة، فبينما كانت الجيوش تخرج منها للغزو والتوسعات، كان الفقهاء يخرجون منها لينتشروا بين البلاد يعلِّمون العربية وينشرون الإسلام. فهي بذلك تحمل في كلّ شبر من أرضها عطر مجد شامخ وإرثا عريقا يؤكده تاريخها الزّاهر ومعالمها الباقية التي تمثل مراحل هامة من التاريخ العربي الإسلامي. لقد بقيت القيروان حوالي أربعة قرون عاصمة الإسلام الأولى لإفريقية والأندلس ومركزا حربيّا للجيوش الإسلامية ونقطة ارتكاز رئيسية لإشاعة اللغة العربية. وعندما تذكر القيروان يذكر القائد العربي الكبير عقبة بن نافع وقولته المشهورة عندما بلغ في توسعاته المحيط الأطلسي وهو يرفع يده إلى السماء ويصرخ بأعلى صوته : «اللهم اشهد أني بلغت المجهول ولولا هذا البحر لمضيت في البلاد أقاتل من كفر بك حتى لا يعبد أحد من دونك». تقع القيروان في تونس على بُعد 160 كم من العاصمة تونس. وكلمة القيروان كلمة فارسية دخلت إلى العربية، وتعني مكان السلاح ومحط الجيش أو استراحة القافلة وموضع اجتماع الناس في الحرب..

أصل التسمية
يرجع أصل كلمة «القيروان» إلى كلمة «کاروان» الفارسية، والتي تعني الرَّتْل العسكري أو القافلة. وهي نفسها الكلمة التي أعطت «caravane» الفرنسية.

اختيار موقع القيروان
اجتمع عقبة بن نافع بعد انتهائه من بناء مدينة القيروان بوجود أصحابه وأهل العسكر فدار بهم حول مدينة القيروان، وأقبل يدعو لها ويقول في دعائه: اللهم املأها علما وفقها، وأعمرها بالمطيعين والعابدين، واجعلها عزا لدينك وذلا لمن كفر بك، وأعز بها الإسلام.
فلما أرسى عقبة بن نافع قواعد مدينته الجديدة، لم يكن يدري وهو يدعو ربّه ليمنعها من جبابرة الأرض ويملأها فقهاً وعلماً ويجعلها عزّاً للإسلام أيّ مصير تخبِّئه لها الأيام، إلا أنه استراتيجياً كان موفَّقاً في اختياره، فالقيروان توجد على مسيرة يوم من البحر الذي كان البيزنطيون يسيطرون على عبابه، وهي تبعد بمثل ذلك عن الجبال، حيث كانت آنذاك تعتصم القبائل البربرية المناوئة للإسلام، وتمثل القاعدة المحدثة رأس الحربة وسط خط المواجهة المتخذ بين المسلمين والبيزنطيين، بعد انهزام ملكهم جرجير في سبيطلة أمام جيوش معاوية بن حديج سنة 45 هـ، 665 م وتراجع سلطانهم وانحصاره في شمال البلاد.
بجانب ذلك فالقيروان في منبسط من الأرض مديد يسمح باستنفار الفرسان في غير صعوبة، وقد كانت الخيل قوام جيش المسلمين في جُلّ معاركهم وحروبهم المصيرية، وقد راعى عقبة في اختياره لموقع مدينته الجديدة تقريبها من السبخة حتى يوفّر ما تحتاجه الإبل من المراعي، وتسمية القيروان تستجيب للغرض الأصلي من تأسيسها فهي كلمة معرَّبة عن اللغة الفارسية وتعني المعسكر أو القافلة أو محط أثقال الجيش.
ولا ريب أن مختلف الحملات والغزوات التي سبقت بناء القيروان كانت تمر بالموقع، وتتّفق المصادر على أن معاوية بن حديج قد عسكر خلال إحدى حملاته الثلاث على إفريقيّة بالموضع المعروف بالقرن على بعد عشرة كيلومترات شمال غربي القيروان، كما تذكر كتب الطبقات أن الصحابي أبا زمعة البلوي قد استشهد خلال غزوة معاوية بن حديج الأولى العام 34 هـ، 654 م وهو محاصر لجلولة، فأُخذ ودُفن بموضع القيروان

المكانة العلمية للقيروان
كانت القيروان أولى المراكز العلمية في المغرب العربي تليها قرطبة في الأندلس ثم فاس في المغرب الأقصى ولقد قصدها أبناء المغرب وغيرها من البلاد المجاورة. وكان مسجد عقبة الجامع ومعه بقية مساجد القيروان تعقد فيه حلقات للتدريس وأنشئت مدارس جامعة أطلقوا عليها (دور الحكمة). واستقدم لها العلماء والفقهاء ورجال الدعوة من الشرق فكانت هذه المدارس وما اقترن به إنشاؤها من انصراف القائمين عليها للدرس والبحث عاملا في رفع شأن لغة القرآن لغة العرب وثقافتهم.
ولقد كان للقيروان دور كبير في نشر وتعليم الدين وعلومه بحكم ما علق على هذه المدينة من آمال في هداية الناس وجلبهم إلى إفريقية وهي نقطة هامة لاحظها الفاتحون منذ أن استقر رأيهم على إنشاء مدينة القيروان، فعندما عزم عقبة بن نافع ومن معه على وضع محراب المسجد الجامع فكروا كثيرا في متجه القبلة، وراقبوا طلوع الشمس وغروبها عدة أيام. وقال له أصحابه:

وأصبح محراب القيروان أسوة وقدوة لبقية مساجد المغرب الإسلامي بمعناه الواسع حتى إن محمد بن حارث الخشني بعد أن قدم من القيروان إلى سبتة وشاهد انحراف مسجدها عن قبلة الصلاة عدله وصوبه.
وفي عهد الخليفة الأموي عمر بن عبد العزيز (99-101 هـ / 717 -720م) أراد تثقيف أهل المغرب وتعليمهم أمر دينهم فجعل من مدينة القيروان مركزا للبعثة العلمية المكونة من عشرة أشخاص من التابعين فأرسلهم إلى إفريقية حيث انقطعوا إلى تعليم السكان أمور الدين، ومات غالب أفراد البعثة في مدينة القيروان نفسها.
وهكذا أصبحت مدينة القيروان مركزا للعلم في المغرب الإسلامي حتى كانت مفخرة المغرب. ومنها خرجت علوم المذهب المالكي، وإلى أئمتها كل عالم ينتسب وكان قاضي القيروان يمثل أعلى منصب ديني في عموم البلاد المغربية، وإليه المرجع في تسمية قضاة مختلف الجهات.
و أسهمت القيروان في عهد الأغالبة في نشر المذهب المالكي في أرجاء الدولة الأغلبية، ومنها انتشر في صقلية والأندلس. وقد تم ذلك على يد الإمام سحنون (160-240 هـ / 777 -855م)، وأقرانه وتلاميذه. فهؤلاء كانوا يلتزمون المذهب المالكي، إذ أنهم كانوا يذهبون لأداء فريضة الحج، ثم يلزمون الإمام مالك بن أنس في المدينة المنورة، فتأثروا بفقهه. وقد ولي سحنون قضاء القيروان (234-240 هـ / 848 -854 م)، فكان صاحب النفوذ الأكبر لا في شئون القضاء فحسب، بل في جميع شئون الدولة. ولما عاد سحنون من المدينة المنورة كان قد وضع أسس الكتاب الذي دونه ويسمى المدونة التي أصبحت قاعدة التدريس في المغرب الأدنى، ومن هناك انتقلت إلى الأندلس. وكانت الكتب الفقهية التي ألفها علماء القيروان ابتداء من كتاب المدونة لصاحبه الفقيه الكبير سحنون والذي أصبح مرجعا دينيا لرجال القيروان، إلى رسالة ابن أبي زيد ونوادره وزياداته إلى تهذيب أبي سعيد البراذعي، كانت هذه الكتب وأمثالها عمدة الدارسين والشراح والمعلقين لا يعرفون غيرها إلى المائة السابعة من التاريخ الهجري عندما ابتدأت كتب المشارقة تأتي إلى المغرب مثل مختصر ابن الحاجب ومختصر خليل فيما بعد.

بيت الحكمة
أنشئت في القيروان المكتبات العامة والمكتبات الملحقة بالجوامع والمدارس والزوايا وكانت مفتوحة للدارسين وتضم نفائس أمهات الكتب. ومن أشهر مكتبات القيروان بيت الحكمة الذي أنشأه إبراهيم الثاني 261-289 هـ / 875 -902 م. في رقادة بالقيروان محاكاة لبيت الحكمة التي أسسها هارون الرشيد في بغداد حيث كانت هذه البيت نواة لمدرسة الطب القيروانية التي أثرت في الحركة العلمية في المغرب لزمن طويل.
وقد استقدم إبراهيم بن أحمد الأغلبي أعدادا كبيرة من علماء الفلك والطب والنبات والهندسة والرياضيات من المشرق والمغرب وزوده بالآلات الفلكية. وكان إبراهيم بن أحمد يبعث كل عام (وأحيانا كل ستة أشهر) بعثة إلى بغداد هدفها تجديد ولائه للخلافة العباسية واقتناء نفائس الكتب المشرقية في الحكمة والفلك مما لا نظير له في المغرب واستقدام مشاهير العلماء في العراق ومصر. وعلى هذا النحو أمكنه في أمد قصير أن يقيم في رقادة نموذجا مصغرا من بيت الحكمة في بغداد، ولم يلبث هذا البيت أن وقع في أيدي الفاطميين بعد سنوات معدودة من وفاته.
ولقد كان بيت الحكمة معهدا علميا للدرس والبحث العلمي والترجمة من اللاتينية، ومركزا لنسخ المصنفات، وكان يتولى الإشراف عليه حفظة مهمتهم السهر على حراسة ما يحتويه من كتب، وتزويد الباحثين والمترددين عليه من طلاب العلم بما يلزمهم من هذه الكتب حسب تخصصاتهم، ويرأس هؤلاء الحفظة ناظر كان يعرف بصاحب بيت الحكمة.
وأول من تولى هذا المنصب عالم الرياضيات أبو اليسر إبراهيم بن محمد الشيباني الكاتب المعروف بأبي اليسر الرياضي، وهو بغدادي النشأة، حيث أتيح له أن يلتقي بالعديد من المحدثين والفقهاء والأدباء واللغويين. وكان قد تنقل في أقطار المشرق قبل أنتقاله إلى الأندلس وأخيرا استقر بالقيروان.
وكان الأمير إبراهيم بن أحمد يعقد المجالس العلمية للمناظرة في بيت الحكمة، وكان يحضر هذه المجالس العلماء البارزون من فقهاء المالكية والحنفية.

المساجد
يعد مسجد القيروان الذي بناه عقبة بن نافع عند إنشاء المدينة من أهم معالمها عبر التاريخ. ولقد بدأ المسجد صغير المساحة، بسيط البناء، ولكن لم يمض على بنائه عشرون عاما حتى هدمه حسان بن نعمان الغساني وأقام مكانه مسجدا جديدا أكبر من الأول. وفي عهد الخليفة هشام بن عبد الملك أمر بزيادة مساحته، وأضاف إليه حديقة كبيرة في شماله، وجعل له صهريجا للمياه، وشيد مآذنه.
وفي عام 155 هـ / 724 م أعيد بناؤه على يد يزيد بن حاتم، وظل على حاله هذه إلى أن تولى
زيادة الله بن إبراهيم بن الأغلب إمارة إفريقية عام 201 هـ / 817 م فزاد فيه. ولقد سارت التوسعات في العصور المختلفة حتى أصبح يشغل اليوم مساحة مستطيلة تتراوح أضلاعها ما بين (70 و122) مترا.
ويعتبر جامع القيروان من أقدم مساجد المغرب الإسلامي والمصدر الأول الذي اقتبست منه العمارة المغربية والأندلسية عناصرها الزخرفية والمعمارية. كما كان هذا المسجد ميدانا للحلقات الدينية والعلمية واللغوية التي ضمت نخبة من أكبر علماء ذلك العصر.

من أعلام القيروان
لقد تميّز كل عصر من عصور القيروان بعدد وافر من الأسماء والأعلام في شتى ضروب العلم والمعرفة لمّْا كانت عاصمة المغرب العربي وأعظم مدن القارة الإفريقية ومنارة عالية للإشعاع الفكري والديني والحضاري في عصور الأغالبة والفاطميين والصنهاجيين. ومن هؤلاء الأعلام الإمام سحنون وابن رشيق القيرواني وابن شرف وأسد بن الفرات وابن الجزار.
لكن المهتمين بالتاريخ يذكرون خصوصا اسم المعزّ بن باديس الصنهاجي كأكبر رمز لما بلغته القيروان من حضارة في عهد الصنهاجيين وعبد الله بن الأغلب الذي جعل من القيروان اسما ملأ الدنيا، أما عقبة بن نافع فإنه يظل الفاتح والمؤسس.
كان من أوائل من قام بالتعليم في مدينة القيروان أولئك العشرة من التابعين الذين أرسلهم عمر بن عبد العزيز ليعلموا الناس وكان من أشهر أولئك العشرة إسماعيل بن عبيد الله بن أبي المهاجر الذي كان -بالإضافة إلى أنه عامل للخليفة- من أكثر أفراد تلك البعثة اندفاعا في نشر الدين وإدخال البربر إلى الإسلام.
وكان منهم عبد الله بن يزيد الحُبُلي الذي شهد الاستيلاء على الأندلس مع موسى بن نصير، ثم عاد إلى القيروان ومات فيها.
ومنهم أيضا إسماعيل بن عبيد المشهور بلقب «تاجر الله» وهو الذي بنى المسجد المعروف باسم مسجد الزيتونة، كما بنى سوقا للتجارة عرفت باسم سوق إسماعيل. وقد استشهد غريقا في إحدى الغزوات البحرية لصقلية سنة 107 هـ / 726 م، ومنهم عبد الرحمن بن رافع التنوخي أول من تولى القضاء بمدينة القيروان.
وأما رواد الفقه في القيروان فهم كثير منهم الإمام سحنون بن سعيد الفقيه صاحب أبي القاسم - تلميذ الإمام مالك - ومؤلف كتاب المدونة والذي كان له دور كبير في تدوين المذهب المالكي، وقد حضر دروس هذا الفقيه العديد من طلاب الأندلس الذين قاموا بنشر مذهبه فيما بعد.
وقد عرفت من رجال الفقه كذلك أسد بن الفرات قاضي إفريقية في عهد الأغالبة وقائد الحملة إلى صقلية وفاتح الجزيرة ومحمد ابن الإمام سحنون بن سعيد وابن أبي زيد القيرواني.
كما اشتهر فيها من الشعراء: أبو عبد الله القزاز القيرواني، والحسين بن رشيق القيرواني، وابن هانئ الأندلسي.
وكان من بين علمائها عبد الكريم النهشلي عالم اللغة وكان من أهل الأدب أبو إسحاق (الحصري) القيرواني صاحب زهر الآداب.
أما عن مدرسة الطب فقد اشتهرت منها أسرة ابن الجزار التي توارثت الطب أبا عن جد.

دورها
لعبت مدينة القيروان دورا رئيسيا في القرون الإسلامية الأولى، فكانت العاصمة السياسية للمغرب الإسلامي ومركز الثقل فيه منذ ابتداء الفتح إلى آخر دولة الأمويين بدمشق. وعندما تأسست الخلافة العباسية ببغداد رأت فيها عاصمة العباسيين خير مساند لها لما أصبح يهدد الدولة الناشئة من خطر الانقسام والتفكك. ومع ظهور عدة دول مناوئة للعاصمة العباسية في المغرب الإسلامي فقد نشأت دولة الأمويين بالأندلس، ونشأت الدولة الرستمية في الجزائر، ونشأت الدولة الإدريسية العلوية في المغرب الأقصى.
وكانت كل دولة من تلك الدول تحمل عداوة لبني العباس خاصة الدولة الإدريسية الشيعية التي تعتبرها بغداد أكبر خطر يهددها. لهذا كله رأى هارون الرشيد أن يتخذ سدا منيعا يحول دون تسرب الخطر الشيعي. ولم ير إلا عاصمة إفريقية قادرة على ذلك، فأعطى لإبراهيم بن الأغلب الاستقلال في النفوذ وتسلسل الإمارة في نسله.
وقامت دولة الأغالبة (184-296هـ / 800 -909م) كوحدة مستقلة ومدافعة عن الخلافة. وقد كانت دولة الأغالبة هذا الدرع المنيع أيام استقرارها، ونجحت في ضم صقلية إلى ملكها عام 264 هـ / 878 م، وقام أمراؤها الأوائل بأعمال بنائية ضخمة في القيروان ذاتها ومنها توسيع الجامع في القيروان، وتوسيع الجامع في تونس، كما عمل الأغالبة على الاهتمام بالزراعة والري في المنطقة، وأقاموا الفسقية المشهورة.
وقد استغل الأمراء الأغالبة تلك المكانة واتخذوها سلاحا يهددون به عاصمة بغداد كلما هم خليفة من خلفائها بالتقليل من شأن الأمراء الأغالبة أو انتقاص سيادتهم. وهذا ما فعله زيادة الله بن الأغلب مع الخليفة المأمون العباسي. فقد أراد هذا الأخير إلحاق القيراون بولاية مصر، وطلب من زيادة الله أن يدعو لعبد الله بن طاهر بن الحسين والي المأمون على مصر فأدخل زيادة الله رسول المأمون إليه، وقال له: إن الخليفة يأمرني بالدعاء لعبد خزاعة. هذا لا يكون أبدا ثم مد يده إلى كيس بجنبه فيه ألف دينار ودفعه للرسول. وكان في الكيس دنانير مضروبة باسم الأدارسة في المغرب ؛ ففهم المأمون مقصد الأمير الأغلبي فكف عن محاولته ولم يعد إليها.
وبسبب هذه المكانة فقد عمل على التقرب منها أكبر ملك في أوروبا إذ بعث الإمبراطور شارلمان بسفرائه إلى إبراهيم بن الأغلب فقابلهم في دار الإمارة بالعباسية في أبهة عجيبة بالرغم من الصلات الودية التي كانت بين هذا الإمبراطور والخليفة العباسي هارون الرشيد.
وفي عهد ولاية إبراهيم بن أحمد بن محمد بن الأغلب (261 - 289 هـ / 875 -902 م) بدأت الفتن تدب بين أمراء الأغالبة. وكان إبراهيم بن أحمد سفاحا لم تسلم منه عامة الناس ولا أقرب الناس إليه وكان غدره بسبعمائة من أهل بلزمة سنة 280 هـ / 894 م سببا من أسباب سقوط دولة بني الأغلب. وفي نفس السنة شقت عصا الطاعة في وجه هذا الأمير مدن تونس، وباجة، وقمودة، وغيرها. وعمت الفوضى أرجاء البلاد بينما الخطر العبيدي الشيعي يزداد يوما بعد يوم. ولما أيقن إبراهيم بن أحمد بخطر بني عبيد حاول سنة 289 هـ /902 م تغيير سياسته، فرفع المظالم، واستمال الفقهاء، وبذل الأموال للشعب ولكن بدون جدوى. وفي عهد حفيده زيادة الله ازداد خوف بغداد واشتد جزعها من الزحف العبيدي فبعث الخليفة العباسي المكتفي بالله يحث أهل إفريقية على نصرة زيادة الله فلم يكن لذلك صدى في النفوس وبذل زيادة الله الأموال بلا حساب ولكن دون جدوى. فلم يمض على هذا الحادث سوى ثلاث سنوات حتى جاءت معركة الأربس الحاسمة سنة 296 هـ / 909 م وفر على إثرها زيادة الله إلى
المشرق ومعه وجوه رجاله وفتيانه وعبيده. وباستيلاء العبيديين على القيروان جمعوا كل المغرب تحت سيطرتهم فشجعهم ذلك على متابعة السير نحو المشرق. وأمكن لهم فيما بعد أن يستولوا على مصر والشام والحجاز. ولولا الظروف السياسية والوضع الداخلي للفاطميين لاستولوا على بغداد نفسها.

وعندما انتقل بنو عبيد إلى مصر ووصل المعز لدين الله الفاطمي القاهرة عام 362 هـ / 973 م اهتموا بالقيروان واتخذوها مركزا لنائبهم في إفريقية، وعهدوا إليه بالسهر على حفظ وحدة المغرب والسيطرة عليه. واستخلف المعز الفاطمي بلكين بن زيري الصنهاجي على إفريقية، وكتب إلى العمال وولاة الأشغال بالسمع والطاعة له فأصبح أميرا على إفريقية والمغرب كله، وقام بلكين وخلفاؤه بقمع الثورات التي حصلت خاصة في المغرب في قبائل زناتة.
واستمر المغرب في وحدته الصنهاجية وتبعيته إلى مصر الفاطمية إلى أن انقسم البيت الصنهاجي على نفسه فاستقل حماد الصنهاجي عن القيروان متخذا من القلعة التي بناها قاعدة لإمارته. وكان هذا الانقسام السياسي خير ممهد لظهور دولة المرابطين في المغرب الأقصى. كما كان لهذا الانقسام نتائجه الأليمة فيما بعد عندما أعلن المعز ابن باديس الصنهاجي استقلاله عن الفاطميين، فبعثوا إليه بقبائل الأعراب من الهلاليين فمزق شمل الدولة، وقضى على معالم الحضارة، وخربت القيروان، ولم تعد العاصمة السياسية القوية أو مركزا تشع منه المعارف والعلوم والآداب.
الشيخ عبد الرحمن خليف (27 ماي 1917 - 19 فيفري 2006)

المدينة الحديثة
إحدى أهم المدن التونسية ومقر الولاية (117.903 ألف نسمة، عام 2004). تتكون المدينة الحديثة، كسائر مدن المغرب العربي، من القصبة حيث المركز الإداري ومنازل الأعيان المحلّين ومن الأسواق.
يتكون وسط المدينة من شارع الجمهورية وشارع ثورة 14 جانفي 2011 في المدينة العتيقة وساحة الشهداء عند باب الجلادين حيث يوجد في هذه الشوارع كافة المرافق من مدارس ومعاهد ومعاهد عليا ومقاهي ومحلات الملابس الفاخرة والادارات العمومية والمكاتب والبنوك والنزل ومحلات المأكولات السريعة والتقليدية خاصة أكلة الكفتاجي الشهيرة.....

معالم المدينة
جامع عقبة: من أروع شواهد العمارة الإسلامية في المغرب العربي، كان يعتبر أكبر جوامع المغرب العربي حتى أواخر القرن 20 تاريخ بناء جامع الحسن الثاني بالدار البيضاء.
مقام الصحابي أبي زمعة البلوي: وهو من أهم المزارات الدينية في تونس.
مقام سيدي عبيد الغرياني
مقام سيدي عمر عبادة
بئر بروطة
فسقيات الأغالبة
جامع الأبواب الثلاثة
المتحف الوطني للفنون الإسلامية برقادة
سور المدينة: أبواب السور (باب الجلادين وهو الباب الرئيسي والأكثر حركية، باب تونس: ثاني أهم الأبواب، الباب الجديد: قبالة مسجد الزيتونة، باب الخوخة وهو الباب المؤدي إلى مسجد عقبة بن نافع، باب لِلاَ ريحانة وهو يؤدي إلى المسجد أيضا ويقع عند مقام سيدي السيوري...)
الأسواق : سوق الربع حيث يباع سجاد القيروان الشهير (الزربية)، سوق البلاغجية حيث تصنع وتباع الأحذية والسروج، سوق الجرابة حيث تنسج وتباع الأقمشة والأغطية ولوازم صناعة السجاد، سوق العطارين حيث تباع العطرات والبخور ولوازم الأعراس، سوق النحاسين حيث تصنع وتباع أواني النحاس، سوق الخضراوين...

التوأمة
قرطبة، إسبانيا.
 فاس، المغرب منذ 2010.

صور
وصلات خارجية
الموقع الرسمي
بوابة القيروان
قائمة الحكام بالقيروان


== مراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 5,186
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kairouan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kairouan (arabe : ٱلْقَيْرَوَان, /qɪrwɛːn/ ) est une ville du centre de la Tunisie et le chef-lieu du gouvernorat du même nom. Elle se situe à 150 kilomètres au sud-ouest de Tunis et 50 kilomètres à l'ouest de Sousse. Peuplée de 139 070 habitants en 2014, elle est souvent désignée comme la quatrième ville sainte (ou sacrée) de l'islam et la première ville sainte du Maghreb.
Première ville arabe et musulmane d'Afrique du Nord, Kairouan a été un centre majeur pour la diffusion de l'islam et de la langue arabe au Maghreb. La ville conserve encore aujourd'hui une place particulière pour les musulmans de la région, notamment pendant le Mouled, où des fidèles de toute la Tunisie et d'autres pays affluent pour participer aux célébrations.
Avec sa médina et ses marchés organisés par corporations à la mode orientale, ses mosquées et autres édifices religieux, Kairouan est inscrite depuis 1988 sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco. En 2009, elle est proclamée capitale de la culture islamique par l'Organisation du monde islamique pour l'éducation, les sciences et la culture.
La ville est aussi réputée pour ses tapis de laine artisanaux et ses pâtisseries dont les makrouds.

Étymologie
Le nom de la ville, Kairouan (en arabe : قيروان, Qayrawân), est une déformation du mot persan (en persan : کاروان, kârvân) signifiant « camp militaire » (kâr pour guerre/militaire lié au latin guer et vân pour campement), « caravane » ou « lieu de repos ».

Géographie
Situation
Kairouan est située à 70 kilomètres de la côte méditerranéenne. Son territoire est délimité par Sbikha au nord, Chebika à l'ouest, Bou Hajla et Nasrallah au sud.

Climat
Le climat de la ville est plus chaud et sec par rapport au littoral.

Histoire
Fondation de la ville
C'est sous la direction d'Oqba Ibn Nafi al-Fihri que la ville de Kairouan est fondée. Bien que la date de 670 soit souvent reprise en tant que date de fondation de la ville, celle-ci reste sujette à discussion. 
En effet, la date de 670 pour l'arrivée d'Oqba et la fondation de Kairouan n'apparaît que dans une minorité de sources, qui sont, en outre, tardives (Ibn al-Athîr, Al-Nowaïri et Ibn Idhari). Contre cette tradition, Ibn Khaldoun et ‘Ubayd Allâh le font arriver en 662-663, Ibn 'Abd al-Hakam en 666-667, Abû-l-‘Arab en 675-676 et Al-Mâlikî en 676-677.
Kairouan est fondée sur la ligne de confrontation entre Byzantins et musulmans dans le but d'en faire un point d'appui dans leur campagne de conquête de l'Afrique du Nord. L'emplacement choisi pour sa fondation, à l'intérieur des terres, semble particulièrement inhospitalier mais se situe suffisamment loin de la côte pour éviter les assauts de la flotte byzantine contrôlant alors la mer Méditerranée. Il fait aussi face aux montagnes qui sont le refuge des Berbères. Le qayrawān, ou camp de garnison, a donné son nom au site, puis par la suite à la ville. Kairouan possède alors une double fonction militaire et religieuse, assurant à la fois la guerre sainte et la défense des terres nouvellement conquises.
La ville est ainsi la première ville arabe d'Afrique du Nord. Capitale de l'Ifriqiya pendant cinq siècles, elle a été un lieu de diffusion exceptionnel de la civilisation arabo-musulmane.

Histoire générale
À la suite des combats qui opposent Berbères et Arabes, lors de la conquête arabe, Oqba Ibn Nafi est tué par le chef berbère Koceïla, qui s'empare de la ville de Kairouan de 682 à 684. Il rebaptise la ville en berbérisant son nom en Taqirwant.
Plusieurs années après, une armée arabe conduite par Zuhayr ibn Kays défait l'armée de Koceïla à Mammès et reprend Kairouan entre 687 et 689.
Oqba Ibn Nafi édifie à Kairouan la grande mosquée de Kairouan. La légende rapporte, que sur l'emplacement de la future Kairouan, un soldat de Oqba aurait trébuché sur une coupe en or enterrée dans le sable. Cette coupe aurait été reconnue comme ayant disparu de La Mecque quelques années plus tôt, et lorsqu'on la déterra, une source d'eau aurait jailli, donnant une eau qui serait venue de la même source que celle sacrée de Zamzam à La Mecque. Cette histoire a fait de Kairouan un lieu de pèlerinage, et elle est souvent désignée comme la quatrième ville sainte (ou sacrée) de l'islam et la première ville sainte du Maghreb.
Vers 775, Abou Qurra assiège Kairouan et y répand durant un temps le kharidjisme sufrite. Devenue la capitale des Aghlabides, la cité prospère rapidement au cours du IXe siècle et devient le siège principal du pouvoir en Ifriqiya et un grand centre de rayonnement de la culture arabe et de l'islam, rivalisant avec les autres centres du bassin méditerranéen. C'est une grande ville de commerce et de science renommée pour son école de droit malikite et son école de médecine formée par Ishaq Ibn Imran. Kairouan joue également un rôle significatif dans l'arabisation des Berbères et des populations de langue latine de l'Ifriqiya.
En 909, les Fatimides, chiites ismaïliens menés par Abu Abd Allah ach-Chi'i, s'emparent de l'Ifriqiya et font de Kairouan leur résidence. Mais la ville perd son statut avec la fondation de Mahdia sur la côte orientale et sa proclamation comme capitale du califat fatimide. Mais les tensions ethnico-religieuses avec la population strictement sunnite de la ville obligent les Fatimides à abandonner le point d'appui qu'ils s'étaient constitué pour rejoindre l'Égypte vers 972-973 où il fonderont Le Caire, le nouveau centre du califat. Entretemps intervient la prise de Kairouan par l'ibadite Abu Yazid qui parvient ainsi, avec l'aide de la population sunnite de la ville, à interrompre brièvement l'hégémonie des Fatimides entre 944 et 946.

Au milieu du Xe siècle, Kairouan dépasse les 100 000 habitants. Son approvisionnement en eau est assuré par un réseau de canalisations provenant des montagnes environnantes et un grand nombre de citernes réparties dans la ville et en dessous de la mosquée. Les grands réservoirs datant de l'époque aghlabide sont encore visibles de nos jours.

Après le retrait définitif des Fatimides, c'est une dynastie vassale de ces derniers, les Zirides, qui prend le pouvoir en Ifriqiya. Al-Muizz ben Badis (1016–1062), son plus illustre représentant, mène une politique en faveur de la population sunnite. La ville connaît alors la dernière période d'épanouissement de son histoire.
En effet, en 1054, les Fatimides du Caire organisent une expédition punitive contre les Zirides devenus dissidents : les tribus bédouines des Hilaliens et des Banu Sulaym foncent sur la ville, la détruisant presque entièrement.
En 1057, Al-Muizz ben Badis s'enfuit à Mahdia et livre Kairouan et ses environs au pillage. Avec l'essor des villes côtières sous le règne des Hafsides, et principalement de Tunis, Kairouan décline inéluctablement. En 1702, Hussein Ier Bey en restaure l'enceinte et de nombreuses mosquées. 
Au cours de l'offensive française menée pour prendre le contrôle du pays, les troupes commandées par le général Étienne prennent Kairouan le 26 octobre 1881.
L'occupation de la ville paralyse la résistance et accélère la soumission de la Tunisie. Pendant le protectorat français, la ville devient tout de même l'un des foyers de la résistance nationaliste.
En 2009, elle est proclamée capitale de la culture islamique par l'Organisation du monde islamique pour l'éducation, les sciences et la culture.

Architecture et urbanisme
Depuis le 9 décembre 1988, la médina de Kairouan est inscrite sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco en répondant à cinq des six critères d'évaluation ; à noter que pour être classé au patrimoine mondial, il suffit qu'un site réponde à un seul des six critères et parmi les sites classés à travers le monde, rares sont ceux, à l'image de Kairouan, ayant répondu à cinq critères. D'une part, la Grande Mosquée est l'un des monuments majeurs de l'islam et un chef-d'œuvre de l'architecture universelle. Elle a servi de modèle à plusieurs mosquées maghrébines en particulier pour ce qui concerne les motifs décoratifs. D'autre part, la mosquée des Trois Portes, construite en 866, est la plus ancienne des mosquées à façade sculptée de l'islam. Kairouan offre également un témoignage exceptionnel sur la civilisation des premiers siècles de l'hégire en Ifriqiya et son architecture islamique traditionnelle, associée à sa configuration spatiale, est devenue vulnérable sous l'effet des mutations économiques et constitue un patrimoine précieux. Kairouan est enfin l'une des villes saintes et des capitales spirituelles de l'islam.

Édifices religieux
Plus ancien lieu de pèlerinage du pays et du Maghreb, Kairouan continue d'attirer les fidèles dans ses sanctuaires tels que la grande mosquée, fondée en 670 et datant principalement du IXe siècle, et la mosquée du Barbier bâtie en grande partie au XVIIe siècle.

Grande mosquée de Kairouan
La grande mosquée de Kairouan, aussi appelée mosquée Sidi Oqba, reste aujourd'hui encore l'emblème de la ville et constitue le plus ancien et le plus prestigieux monument islamique de Tunisie et du Maghreb. Cette mosquée est également considérée comme l'une des plus belles et des plus harmonieuses réalisations architecturales de l'Islam.
Elle est fondée vers 670 par le conquérant de l'Afrique du Nord, Oqba Ibn Nafi (communément appelé Sidi Oqba à Kairouan), à proximité du campement de ses armées. Elle est agrandie à plusieurs reprises par les dynasties qui vont se succéder en Tunisie. Sous le règne des Aghlabides, c'est surtout à Ziadet Allah Ier (817–838) et Aboul Ibrahim (856–863) que l'on doit les extensions de la mosquée, le plus illustre historien et prédicateur local de son époque, rapporte que c'est sous le règne d'Aboul Ibrahim que le mihrab a pris sa forme définitive. C'est également à Aboul Ibrahim qu'est attribuée l'extension de la salle de prière pour offrir une nef plus large supportant une nouvelle coupole dans l'axe de la cour intérieure. En 1294, les Hafsides entreprennent une importante rénovation de l'édifice sacré, les portails étant réétayés et les galeries pourvues de nouveaux arcs. En dépit de multiples mesures modificatives, le cœur ancien de la Grande Mosquée est resté aujourd'hui dans sa forme originelle datant de l'époque des Aghlabides (au cours du IXe siècle).

Dans sa forme définitive, la mosquée s'étend sur 125 mètres de long et 73 mètres de large, couvrant une superficie totale de 9 000 m2. Elle appartient au type architectural de la mosquée de cour. La salle de prière supporte deux coupoles côtelées dont l'une est disposée au-dessus du mihrab aménagé au milieu du mur de la qibla, partie la plus ancienne, tandis que l'autre coupole a été construite lors de l'extension de la mosquée, au-dessus d'une galerie à arcs outrepassés axée sur la grande cour intérieure. La salle de prière se compose de 17 nefs dans le sens de la longueur, sept travées et un transept. La nef centrale mène au mihrab, niche de forme semi-cylindrique, soigneusement ornée de céramiques et de marbre sculpté, dont l'état actuel date du début de la seconde moitié du IXe siècle.
Juste à côté s'élève le minbar original à onze marches. Ses parois latérales ont été montées en caissons très ouvragés en bois de teck importé d'Inde. Ce minbar, réalisé vers l'an 862, est considéré comme la plus ancienne chaire du monde musulman. Au centre de la niche de prière, habillée de panneaux de marbre, on peut lire la sourate 112 du Coran, rédigée en calligraphie kufi, avec l'invocation jointe du prophète, eulogie sur le modèle exact de l'inscription intérieure au Dôme du Rocher de Jérusalem. À proximité du minbar, le souverain ziride Al-Muizz ben Badis édifie la maqsura, le siège de l'imam disposant d'un accès particulier au mur de la qibla, que l'on nomme Bab El Imam. Le bâti décoratif en bois avec sa dédicace de fondation constitue l'un des plus beaux témoignages de l'art musulman.

Selon une inscription ultérieure, la maqsura a été restaurée en 1624. La détermination de la direction pour la prière remonte au VIIe siècle et s'écarte de 31° par rapport à l'orientation exacte ; la qibla n'a pas été modifiée lors de l'ornementation en marbre de la niche d'origine par les Aghlabides. Le minaret, massif et agrandi à deux reprises, atteint désormais trois étages, dont le dernier est coiffé d'une coupole côtelée, et se dresse face à la salle de prière, au milieu du portique nord de la cour. Sa forme tire son origine d'une tour de défense dotée de postes de tir. À l'origine, la mosquée n'avait aucun minaret et son édification remonte au temps du calife omeyyade Hicham ben Abd al-Malik (724-743). Il est de ce fait antérieur d'une centaine d'années à l'aménagement de la salle de prière qui lui fait face et qui date de Ziadet Allah Ier. Datant du VIIIe – IXe siècle, ce minaret est le plus ancien au monde qui soit toujours debout.
Une partie des matériaux de construction, essentiellement les colonnes et les chapiteaux en divers marbres de la salle de prière ainsi que les colonnes soutenant les arcades des galeries entourant la cour, proviennent de sites antiques romains et byzantins de la Tunisie, notamment Sbeïtla et Carthage.

Mosquée des Trois Portes
La mosquée des Trois Portes, située dans la vieille ville, entre le marché aux laines et le rempart sud, était appelée à l'origine Mosquée de Mohammed ibn Khairun par les historiens locaux et les récits de voyageurs. Dans son Histoire du Maghreb, l'historien andalou Ibn Idhari rapporte à propos de la fondation de la mosquée au XIVe siècle qu'« en l'an 252 de l'hégire [correspondant à l'année 866], Mohammed ibn Khairūn al-Andalusī al-Ma'āfirī édifia à Qairawān la mosquée qu'il qualifiait de vénérable, bâtie de briques cuites, de plâtre et de marbre et y fit aménager des citernes ».

Elle doit à sa façade décorative d'être considérée comme l'un des plus beaux spécimens de l'architecture islamique. La façade, haute d'environ 7 mètres, est ornée de trois inscriptions dont la première est une citation des versets 70-71 de la sourate 33 du Coran : « Au nom d'Allah, le Tout Miséricordieux, le Très Miséricordieux. Ô vous qui croyez ! Craignez Allah et parlez avec droiture afin qu'il améliore vos actions et vous pardonne vos péchés. Quiconque obéit à Allah et à Son messager obtient certes une grande réussite. »
L'extrait figure également sur la corniche intermédiaire dans l'extension de la Grande Mosquée de Cordoue réalisée par Al-Hakam II qui gouverne le califat de Cordoue de 962 à 966. On peut penser que la reprise de ce verset provient d'un modèle inspiré par la façade de la mosquée des Trois Portes.

Sur la seconde frise calligraphiée se trouve l'inscription relative à la fondation : « Au nom de Dieu le miséricordieux et le bienveillant. À Dieu seul appartient la décision. Ainsi en a-t-il été et sera de toute éternité. Muhammed bin Khairūn al-Ma'āfirī al-Andalusī a décidé la construction de cette mosquée, pour obtenir la faveur divine et dans l'espoir de Son pardon et de Sa miséricorde, en l'an 252 ». La fondation d'une mosquée est en effet considérée dans l'islam comme une œuvre particulièrement méritoire. Dans les six principaux recueils de hadîths, on rapporte que le prophète Mahomet a dit que « celui qui construit une mosquée, Dieu lui bâtit une maison au Paradis.

La troisième inscription renseigne quant à elle sur la rénovation de la mosquée : « Loué soit Dieu pour ses bienfaits. Puisse Dieu bénir notre maître Mohammed. Le bâtiment de cette mosquée bénie a été rénové en l'an 844 [correspondant aux années 1440–1441]. Nous louons Dieu et nous prions pour notre maître Mohammed et sa famille. »
À l'origine, la mosquée n'avait pas de minaret. Il est vraisemblable que, lors des travaux de restauration sous le règne des Hafsides, un petit minaret de style contemporain a été adjoint à côté de l'arcade orientale de la façade, abîmant du même coup les derniers caractères des deux premières inscriptions. De la salle de prière, on accède au minaret par un escalier étroit qui rompt la symétrie de l'espace intérieur. Il est partagé en trois niveaux, avec des ouvertures pour la lumière et sa hauteur totale n'excède pas 11,5 mètres.

La salle de prière, en trois nefs parallèles au mur de la qibla, à laquelle on accède par trois portes conjointes, ne mesure que 9 mètres sur 8,60 mètres, le plafond étant porté par quatre piliers en marbre coiffés de chapiteaux antiques. L'arche du mihrab est formée d'un arc outrepassé d'une hauteur de 2,60 mètres dans son axe. La citerne, une margelle avec des rainures pour la corde et un emplacement évidé pour la cruche, se trouve à côté de la niche à prière et se voit flanquée de deux colonnes. La citerne est pourvue en eau par les pluies collectées depuis le toit de la mosquée. La mosquée n'a ni minbar, ni cour. On admet toutefois qu'un musalla était adjointe à la façade richement ornée, comme cela est le cas dans la petite mosquée Bu Ftata de Sousse.
Avec son ornementation ancienne, qui remonte au temps des Aghlabides et ses inscriptions originelles, la façade tient une place particulière dans l'architecture islamique. Il est vraisemblable que tout le site a été édifié à des fins privées. On ne sait rien de Muhammad ibn Khairūn al-Ma'āfirī al-Andalusī, fondateur de la mosquée. Il était probablement un commerçant venu à Kairouan depuis l'Espagne musulmane à l'époque aghlabide ; les pierres tombales de plusieurs membres de sa famille ont d'ailleurs été retrouvées. Les historiens locaux d'Afrique du Nord citent également parmi les « martyrs de la foi » le fils du fondateur, l'éminent juriste (faqîh) Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Khairūn, qui s'est fait une renommée à Kairouan en diffusant l'enseignement des zahirites. En 914, sous l'autorité des Fatimides, il est piétiné à mort par des esclaves noirs, sur ordre du préfet fatimide de la ville, en raison de son opposition au chiisme. Son tombeau est connu.

Mosquée du Barbier
Le mausolée de Sidi Sahbi, généralement appelé mosquée du Barbier, est en fait une zaouïa qui se trouve hors les murailles de la médina. Il s'agit d'un vaste ensemble architectural construit en grande partie au cours du XVIIe siècle. C'est le bey mouradite Hammouda Pacha Bey qui fait construire le mausolée, la coupole et la cour alors que le bey Mohamed El Mouradi fait ajouter les bâtiments annexes, le minaret et la médersa constituée d'un oratoire, d'une salle d'ablution et de chambres destinées aux étudiants.
La population y vénère un saint local de Kairouan, un certain Abou Zamaa el-Balaoui, un compagnon du prophète Mahomet. Selon la légende, il aurait conservé trois poils de la barbe du prophète, d'où l'appellation donnée à l'édifice. Dans l'histoire de la ville de Kairouan, ce compagnon du prophète est à relier à une parole attribuée à ce dernier, si l'on en croit notamment Al-Tirmidhî.
Le prophète aurait prédit que « chacun de mes compagnons qui meurt dans un pays, deviendra au jour de la résurrection le guide et la lumière envoyés par Dieu pour les gens de ce pays ». Dès le Xe siècle, les chroniqueurs locaux rapportent que des habitants de la ville auraient découvert là un tombeau contenant un corps intact. L'endroit est donc à considérer comme le pur produit d'une croyance islamique populaire.
On parvient à la sépulture par une grande cour intérieure et un couloir aux parois couvertes de carreaux de céramique richement ouvragés à la mode turque et de panneaux de stuc.
C'est seulement au XVIIe siècle que l'on a fait édifier une coupole au-dessus du tombeau et que l'on a adjoint à la cour intérieure une petite médersa et des locaux pour accueillir les visiteurs du tombeau. Ces ailes ont été rénovées au début des années 1990 et sont aujourd'hui accessibles au public.

Remparts et portes
La médina de Kairouan est entourée par des remparts dont les premiers sont élevés en 762 (six portes) sous le règne du calife abbasside Al-Mansur. À la suite des invasions hilaliennes survenues vers 1057, la taille de la cité ainsi que l'étendue de ses remparts se réduisent considérablement.
Les murailles actuelles remontent aux travaux ordonnés par les souverains husseinites et sont réalisés entre 1706 et 1772.

Autres édifices
Dans le cœur ancien de Kairouan se trouvent plusieurs mosquées, parfois sans minaret, utilisées à l'époque comme lieux de prière par les habitants du quartier. La plus ancienne est vraisemblablement la mosquée d'Ansar qui, si l'on en croit la chronique locale, aurait été fondée par le compagnon du prophète Ruwaifi ibn Thabit al-Ansari en 667. Ceci relève plus de la légende car la fondation de cette petite mosquée de cour, avec salle de prière ouverte et mihrab archaïque, n'a pu être établie par des fouilles archéologiques à ce jour. De plus, le site a été rénové en 1650. L'historien local Al-Dabbagh, mort en 1296, rapporte que la mosquée était très populaire chez les musulmans qui recherchaient une bénédiction : des empreintes de mains terreuses sur le mur blanc extérieur attestent cette pratique cultuelle très courante dans l'islam populaire, y compris jusqu'à aujourd'hui. D'autres mosquées datant de l'époque beylicale se trouvent également dans la médina comme la mosquée Al Malek (XVIIIe siècle) ou la mosquée Al Bey dont la construction remonte à la fin du XVIIe siècle.
Sous le mur nord-ouest de la ville, derrière l'imposant minaret de la Grande Mosquée, s'étend le cimetière de la tribu tunisienne peu connue des Awlad Farhan dont la particularité réside dans l'aménagement particulier de leurs tombes, insolite dans un cimetière musulman. Certaines, rangées par paires et entourées d'un muret, sont la dernière demeure des saints patrons de la tribu. Au bout de la pierre tombale, on a ajouté le nom d'Allah en terre glaise.
Les membres de la tribu vivent aujourd'hui un peu partout en Tunisie mais continuent d'enterrer leurs défunts dans ce cimetière placé sous les murs de la ville. À l'anniversaire de leur mort, et à l'occasion de certains jours de fête, des bougies sont allumées dans une petite niche aménagée dans les pierres tombales.
Parmi les autres monuments importants de Kairouan figurent :

Le mausolée Sidi Abid el Ghariani, ancienne zaouïa élevée durant la seconde moitié du XIVe siècle puis agrandie et embellie au XVIIe siècle. Le monument se distingue par sa décoration raffinée mêlant céramiques, plâtre finement ciselé et plafonds en bois peint et sculpté ;
Le mausolée Sidi Amor Abbada, construit vers 1872, est un édifice abritant le tombeau d'un célèbre marabout du XIXe siècle. Le bâtiment est remarquable à l'extérieur grâce à un ensemble de six coupoles côtelées ;
Les remparts de Kairouan, enceinte fortifiée de la médina à l'origine très ancienne (bâtie dès le VIIIe siècle) mais dont l'état actuel date essentiellement du XVIIIe siècle.

Bassins des Aghlabides
Le calife omeyade Hicham ben Abd al-Malik donne l'ordre au gouverneur de Kairouan, Obeid Allah Ibn El Habhab, de construire quinze bassins pour alimenter la ville en eau. Mais les bassins des Aghlabides, le plus célèbre des quinze bassins, est édifié par le souverain aghlabide Aboul Ibrahim (règne de 856 à 863) entre 860 et 862 : c'est un réservoir constitué de deux citernes circulaires découvertes et communiquant entre elles.
Le grand bassin est un polygone de 64 côtés mesurant 129,67 mètres de diamètre intérieur et d'une capacité de 57 764 m3. Il sert parfois comme bassin de plaisance et de divertissement notamment sous Ziadet Allah III (règne de 903 à 909). Le petit bassin est un polygone simple de 17 côtés faisant 37,40 mètres de diamètre intérieur et d'une capacité de 4 119 m3.
Les eaux de débordement de l'oued Merguellil étaient recueillies dans le plus petit bassin où elles décantaient avant de transiter par le grand bassin pour alimenter en partie la ville.

Culture
Patrimoine écrit
En 1882, les orientalistes français Octave Houdas et René Basset évoquent dans leur rapport sur leur Mission scientifique en Tunisie, paru dans le Bulletin de correspondance africaine, une collection de manuscrits qu'ils auraient vue à la grande mosquée de Kairouan, dans une pièce fermée à proximité du mihrab. En 1897, un employé ministériel tunisien, Muhammad Bek Bayram, présente devant la Société géographique d'Égypte un rapport sur sa mission à Kairouan où il donne des précisions sur cette collection de manuscrits qui, d'après ses informations, aurait été entreposée dans la maqsura aménagée par Al-Muizz ben Badis dans la mosquée.
C'est seulement en 1956 que l'inventaire effectué en 1293-1294 est publié par le chercheur tunisien 
Ibrahim Chabbouh dans la Revue de l'Institut des manuscrits arabes publiée au Caire. Ce relevé ne correspond toutefois plus à l'état effectif du dépôt actuel. L'orientaliste allemand Joseph Schacht, qui avait examiné sur place quelques manuscrits de cette collection non inventoriée en 1953 et 1964, publie en 1967 dans la revue de sciences islamiques Arabica un premier index scientifique des plus importants documents de cette bibliothèque. Ce n'est qu'au milieu des années 1980 que l'on commence à trier le dépôt actuel de manuscrits (essentiellement sur parchemins) par genres, auteurs et titres.
Le ministère des Affaires étrangères tunisien a procuré des locaux pour la conservation des manuscrits, des laboratoires photographiques et de restauration des documents dans l'ancienne résidence estivale du président Habib Bourguiba située à Raqqada, à douze kilomètres de Kairouan. On y trouve également le Centre d'études de la civilisation et des arts islamiques auquel est adjoint le petit musée national d'art islamique qui expose des pièces datant des Aghlabides et des Zirides.

La grande majorité des manuscrits se rapporte au droit musulman et constitue le plus ancien fonds documentaire au monde sur la littérature juridique malikite du IXe siècle. Quelques-uns ont été rédigés dans la période fondatrice du malikisme, entre la rédaction du Al-Muwatta de Mâlik ibn Anas et du Al Mudawwana de l'imam Sahnoun en 854. Les études biographiques et bibliographiques de l'orientaliste Miklós Murányi (de) publiées en 1997 représentent l'état actuel de la recherche sur le monde érudit de Kairouan. En outre, la bibliothèque possède l'une des plus riches collections d'anciens codex coraniques, dont des fragments du Coran bleu, rédigée selon une graphie archaïque sans points diacritiques, remontant à la fin du IXe siècle et au début du Xe siècle.
Dès l'inventaire de 1293-1294, on recensait plusieurs exemplaires du Coran bleu ; quelques pièces se trouvent également de nos jours dans des collections privées. Certes, l'origine de ces codex reste encore obscure mais il est maintenant admis que les feuilles de parchemin bleu et leur enluminure en or ont été réalisées à Kairouan. Un document en hébreu, le Guéniza du Caire, remontant au Xe siècle et par conséquent contemporain de la naissance du Coran bleu, fait état de l'exportation d'indigo égyptien vers la Tunisie. Ce produit était la matière première employée pour teinter les peaux lors de la fabrication du parchemin. Cela dit, on ne sait rien du commanditaire à l'origine de cette œuvre.
La page du Coran bleu représentée ici commence par le verset 1 de la sourate 35 et finit sur la ligne 14 avec le début de son verset 4 (incomplet). Ce qui est caractéristique dans ce codex, c'est la coupure des mots — inhabituelle en arabe — à la fin de la ligne 3 (ر - سلا) et à la fin de la ligne 10 (اذ - كروا). Il est à souligner qu'au milieu de la troisième ligne, le copiste a écrit un verbe (جعل) et non comme dans la version imprimée le participe passé idoine de ce verbe (جاعل) ; cela n'est d'ailleurs pas rare dans le calligraphie kufi où l'on ne marque pas la longueur des voyelles. Toutefois la variante à cet endroit autorise une autre interprétation que celle du verset tel qu'on le lit dans la version imprimée.

Artisanat
Aux premiers siècles de l'ère islamique, l'émirat aghlabite de Kairouan (800-909) payait partiellement le tribut de souveraineté au calife de Bagdad en tapis. Le « tapis de Kairouan » voit sa fabrication commencer réellement au XIXe siècle et la ville reste le principal centre de fabrication du pays. Au début du XXe siècle, la qualité du tapis se dégrade en raison du mauvais usage des teintures artificielles, ce qui conduit une famille kairouanaise à produire le alloucha, un nouveau type de tapis noué à la main qui reprend les couleurs de la laine de mouton et dont un champ hexagonal occupe le centre au moyen d'un motif en forme de losange. Peu à peu, le alloucha évolue vers plus de complexité et de polychromie, la texture augmente et les influences perses se font sentir avec l'apparition du zarbia reconnaissable à sa couleur brun-rouge.
Le tapis de Kairouan est un tapis de points noués non tissé fabriqué à base de laine ou de coton — notamment pour la trame et la chaîne — et plus rarement de lin. Il peut être coloré dans les teintes naturelles du blanc au marron en passant par le gris beige lorsqu'il est de type alloucha. La laine est toujours épaisse, car c'est celle du mouton, mais le poil du dromadaire ou de la chèvre peut être utilisé. Les motifs sont géométriques mais peuvent aussi être des fleurs stylisées, donnant à l'ensemble un aspect symétrique avec prédominance de la forme du losange.

Gastronomie
Le makroud est une pâtisserie maghrébine introduite à Kairouan et en Tunisie par la dynastie des Aghlabides. Il est composé de semoule fourrée d'une pâte de dattes et trempée dans du miel ou du sirop de sucre.

Politique
La liste ci-dessous présente les maires de Kairouan depuis l'indépendance de la Tunisie :

Économie
Transport
Sport
La ville possède sa propre association sportive, la Jeunesse sportive kairouanaise qui regroupe plusieurs sections dont l'une de football qui est connue en Tunisie pour être un vivier de jeunes joueurs tels qu'Amine Chermiti et Zouhaier Dhaouadi. L'équipe évolue au stade Hamda-Laouani.

Jumelages
La municipalité de Kairouan a signé de nombreux accords de coopération et de jumelage avec diverses villes à travers le monde :

Notes et références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
Français
Mokhtar Boukhris, Kairouan, l'autre mémoire, Tunis, Sahar, 2008.
Noureddine Harrazi, Chapiteaux de la grande mosquée de Kairouan, Tunis, Institut national d'archéologie et d'art, 1982.
Mohamed Kerrou, Kairouan, phare éternel de l'islam, Tunis, Apollonia, 2009.
Georges Marçais, Tunis et Kairouan, Tunis, Henri Laurens, 1937.
Bernard Roy et Paule Poinssot, Inscriptions arabes de Kairouan, Paris, Klincksieck (no 3), 1950.
Henri Saladin, Tunis et Kairouan : voyages à travers l'architecture, l'artisanat et les mœurs du début du XXe siècle, Paris, Henri Laurens, coll. « Les Villes d'art célèbres », 1908 (réimpr. 2002).
Élise Voguet, « L'inventaire des manuscrits de la bibliothèque de la grande mosquée de Kairouan (693/1293-4) », Arabica, vol. 50,‎ 2003, p. 532-544.

Autres langues
(de) Gisela Kircher, Die Moschee des Muhammad b. Hairun (Drei-Tore-Moschee) in Qairawân/Tunesien, vol. XXVI, Le Caire, Publications de l'Institut archéologique allemand, 1970.
(en) Jonathan Bloom, « The Blue Koran: An Early Fatimid Kufic Manuscript from the Maghrib », dans Les manuscrits du Moyen-Orient, Istanbul, Institut français d'études anatoliennes, 1989.
(ar) Nejmeddine Hentati, Études d'histoire kairouanaise, Kairouan, Centre d'études islamiques de Kairouan, 2008.
(en) Joseph Schacht, « On some manuscripts in the libraries of Kairouan and Tunis », Arabica, vol. 14,‎ 1967, p. 226–258.
(en) Paul Sebag, The Great Mosque of Kairouan, New York, Macmillan, 1965.

Articles connexes
Église de l'Immaculée-Conception de Kairouan
Yechiva de Kairouan

Liens externes

Site officiel
Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online 
Ressource relative à l'audiovisuel : France 24 
Ressource relative à la musique : MusicBrainz  

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail du patrimoine mondial


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 1,349
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Kairouan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Kairouan (Arabic: القيروان), sometimes spelled Kairwan, Kayrawan or Al Qayrawan, is a city in Tunisia. It's a holy city in Islam, ranking fourth after Mecca, Medina and Jerusalem as a place of pilgrimage. Reputedly seven visits here are the equivalent of one to Mecca. With its large mosques and rich cultural history it has been designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

## Get in
Buses run to Kairouan from the major cities, Tunis, Sousse (2 hrs), and Sfax. Touts from the carpets shops have been known to board the bus a few kilometres outside the city and befriend tourists to lure them into their shops.
Louages run from many destinations into Kairouan; these are probably the best and most frequent way to get into the city. It takes 2 hours and 10.25 DT from Tunis (as of 2016). There is no direct public transport between Kairouan and El Jem, you'd need to change in Sousse.
Kairouan is not located on a train line.
The stations for both buses and louages are to the northwest of the Medina. Though they may well drop you off at a Medina Gate if requested.

## Get around
The Medina is best explored on foot, partially to absorb the atmosphere and partially because some areas are inaccessible to anything bigger. The main street that links the Gate of Martyrs (south) to the Gate of Tunis (northwest) is rather touristic.
Many of the shops near the main mosque will tempt you in with views over the complex, expect to have a look around the shop on the way out, if you don't buy anything a small donation would be polite.

## See
The old Medina with its narrow passageways and streets is in general a nice place to just wander around aimlessly. If it looks familiar it may well be as it was used in Raiders of the Lost Ark to double as Cairo. For those interested in Islamic teachings there are several madrasas, or Islamic schools, in the centre of town that are open for visitors. Three communities coexist here: the Bedouins, the Berbers, the Arabs. You can tell the houses apart by the doors: ring doorknockers, the hands of fatimas, or just Arabic script. The number of rings or hands denote also the number of families in the same house. Green doors are mosques.
35.68138910.1038891 Great Mosque of Kairouan (جامع القيروان الأكبر). One of the finest Islamic buildings in North Africa and rewards closer inspection. Non Muslims are not permitted into the prayer hall, but the doors are open to allow you to view inside. Access to the main courtyard is available to all. The columns throughout the complex were taken from Carthage, the wooden ceiling from Lebanese cedar wood. In the courtyard, there are indents into the floor with varying sizes for camel or dromedary hoofs, or human feet, for washing before prayers. On the tiny platform in the middle of the courtyard, there is also four black pins on a board that tells the prayer times by the sun. Facing the prayer room, on one of the left columns is also a last black pin marking the night prayer by moonlight. Multi-site ticket costs 10 DT, covering 6 sites in Kairouan. And also 1dn for photo taking rights.
35.67702210.1028522 Mosque of the Three Doors (مسجد ابن خيرون). With one of the finest façades in Tunisia, though the interior is not open.
35.67600910.100763 Bi'r Barouta. This well is the place where the city was founded, it is reputedly linked to the ZamZam well in Mecca, it is one of the holiest sites in the city for Muslims. A camel drives the well pump. There is also a small cafe inside the complex serving coffee and tea. Free.
35.67555610.1022224 Maison de Gouveneur. The medina house of a local governor in the past, this house with 18 rooms belonged to him and his 4 wives and 21 children. Extremely beautiful and intricate interior, on the outside unassuming and signposted as 'Tapis-Sabra'. Today a carpet shop, it is covered all over with carpets of all shapes and sizes. Women work on the looms, you can watch and take photos, while an old man gives you a tour and at the end, you're expected to view the carpets (70 DT for a small one).
35.68657910.0955845 Aghlabid Basins (Upon leaving the Gate of Tunis, head along the road to the right till you hit the basins. About a 20-minute walk. It's opposite Hotel Continental.). These cisterns, built by the Aghlabids in the 9th century are more impressive because of their engineering sophistication than as sights in themselves. Water was delivered by aqueduct from the hills 36 km west of Kairouan into the smaller settling basin and then into the enormous main holding basin, which was 5 m deep and 128 m in diameter. In the centre of the main pool was a pavilion where the rulers could come to relax on summer evenings. Most visitors do nothing more than peek at the cisterns from the rooftop of the syndicat d'initiative office nearby, but you can enter with the multiple-site ticket. When the office isn't open, the site seems to be open to everyone anyway.
35.67508510.1015756 Zaouia of Sidi Abid el-Ghariani. This mausoleum was also a Koranic school. Mosaics of the blue mosque in Istanbul, cedar wood ceiling.
Mosque of Ansar. Traditionally dating to 667, but totally renewed in 1650. (updated Nov 2018)
Mosque Al Bey. Late 17th century. (updated Nov 2018)
35.67697810.0949477 Sidi Amor Abada Museum. Sep 16–Jun 16: 09:00-16:00; Jun 17-Sep 30: 08:00-14:00. The museum was established in a zawiya – mausoleum – built in 1872 and containing the tomb of Amor Abada, better known as Sidi Abada. 10 DT.     (updated Nov 2018)

## Further afield
35.59624310.05698 Raqqada National Museum of Islamic art (رقّادة). Raqqāda is the site of the second capital of the 9th-century dynasty of Aghlabids, located about ten kilometers southwest of Kairouan. The site now houses the National Museum of Islamic Art. Which specializes in medieval Islamic art and includes works from Kairouan, Raqqada and Al-Mansuriya, a former princely city built in the Fatimid period.   (updated Nov 2018)

## Do
Sit and enjoy a tea in a traditional tea house if the heat gets a little too much.
Walk the town and appreciate the beautiful and intricate designs.

## Buy
Kairouan is particularly famous for its carpets and visiting a shop is an integral and sometimes unexpected part of experiencing the city. Carpets are graded by their fineness, the number of knots in a square metre, with a normal weave from 10,000 to 40,000, fine weave from 65,000-90,000 and extra fine from 160,000 - 500,000. Silk carpets may be over 500,000 knots per square metre.

## Eat
A speciality of Kairouan is the sticky pastry makrouhd, it can be found all through Tunisia - dates, sesame, and honey. You can tell most shops how much you're willing to spend, and they'll give you a box of pastries. You can mix and match with others!

## Drink
There are a few nice tea houses on the road from the Main Gate into the centre of the city

## Sleep
Many tiny hotels dotted all around town, without much online presence.

## Budget
Hotel Tunisia, Av. de la Republique, ☏ +216 77 231 855.

## Mid-range
35.69232410.1036231 Hôtel Amina, Route de Tunis GP 2, ☏ +216 77 226 555.
35.68589410.0978932 Hotel Continental, ☏ +216 77 231 135. Opposite the Aghabite basins, a little further our from town (10-15 minute walk into Medina). 67 DT for one person, 72 with dinner (June 2016).
35.67248410.1010113 Hotel Splendid, Rue 9 Avril, ☏ +216 77 230 041. 5 minutes' walk from the Porte des Martyrs, which is on one of the main roads of the Medina, so definitely a good position. Very friendly reception that'll be there 24/7. For the price, impeccable (expect broken lightbulbs, the like - but aircon works, and there's hot water. 37 DT for a single person, but definitely negotiable (was offered 30 DT in June 2016).

## Go next
Sousse
Sfax



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
GREAT MOSQUE OF KAIROUAN
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: religious_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:54:15


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 5,414
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Mosque_of_Kairouan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Great Mosque of Kairouan (Arabic: جامع القيروان الأكبر), also known as the Mosque of Uqba (جامع عقبة بن نافع), is a mosque situated in the UNESCO World Heritage town of Kairouan, Tunisia and is one of the largest Islamic monuments in North Africa. 
Established by the Arab general Uqba ibn Nafi in 50 AH (670/671 CE) at the founding of the city of Kairouan, the mosque occupies an area of over 9,000 square metres (97,000 sq ft).  It is one of the oldest places of worship in the Islamic world, and is a model for all later mosques in the Maghreb. Its perimeter, of about 405 metres (1,329 ft), contains a hypostyle prayer hall, a marble-paved courtyard and a square minaret. In addition to its spiritual prestige, the Mosque of Uqba is one of the masterpieces of Islamic architecture, notable among other things for the first Islamic use of the horseshoe arch.
Extensive works under the Aghlabids two centuries later (9th Cent.AD/CE) gave the mosque its present aspect. The fame of the Mosque of Uqba and of the other holy sites at Kairouan helped the city to develop and expand. The university, consisting of scholars who taught in the mosque, was a centre of education both in Islamic thought and in the secular sciences. Its role at the time can be compared to that of the University of Paris in the Middle Ages. With the decline of the city from the mid-11th century, the centre of intellectual thought moved to the University of Ez-Zitouna in Tunis.

Location
Located in the north-east of the medina of Kairouan, the mosque is in the intramural district of Houmat al-Jami (literally "area of the Great Mosque"). This location corresponded originally to the heart of the urban fabric of the city founded by Uqba ibn Nafi. However, given the natural lay of the land crossed by several tributaries of the wadis, the urban development of the city spread southwards. Human factors including Hilalian's invasions in 449 AH (1057 AD) led to the decline of the city and halted development. For all these reasons, the mosque which once occupied the center of the medina when first built in 670 is now on the easternmost quarter abutting the city walls.

History
Evolution
At the foundation of Kairouan in 670, the Arab general and conqueror Uqba ibn Nafi (himself the founder of the city) chose the site of his mosque in the center of the city, near the headquarters of the governor. Around 690, shortly after its construction, the mosque was destroyed during the occupation of Kairouan by the Berbers, originally conducted by Kusaila. It was rebuilt by the Ghassanid general Hasan ibn al-Nu'man in 703. With the gradual increase of the population of Kairouan and the consequent increase in the number of faithful, Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik, Umayyad Caliph in Damascus, charged his governor Bishr ibn Safwan to carry out development work in the city, which included the renovation and expansion of the mosque around the years 724–728. During this expansion, he pulled down the mosque and rebuilt it with the exception of the mihrab. It was under his auspices that the construction of the minaret began. In 774, a new reconstruction accompanied by modifications and embellishments took place under the direction of the Abbasid governor Yazid ibn Hatim.
Under the rule of the Aghlabid dynasty, Kairouan was at its apogee, and the mosque profited from this period of stability and prosperity. In 836, Emir Ziyadat Allah I reconstructed the mosque once more: this is when the building acquired, at least in its entirety, its current appearance. At the same time, the mihrab's ribbed dome  was raised on squinches. Around 862–863, Emir Abu Ibrahim enlarged the oratory, with three bays to the north, and added the cupola over the arched portico which precedes the prayer hall. In 875 Emir Ibrahim II built another three bays, thereby reducing the size of the courtyard which was further limited on the three other sides by the addition of double galleries.
The current state of the mosque can be traced back to the Aghlabid period—no element is earlier than the ninth century besides the mihrab—except for some partial restorations and a few later additions made in 1025 during the Zirid period, 1248 and 1293–1294 under the reign of the Hafsids, 1618 at the time of Muradid beys, and in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. In 1967, major restoration works, executed during five years and conducted under the direction of the National Institute of Archeology and Art, were achieved throughout the monument, and were ended with an official reopening of the mosque during the celebration of the Mawlid of 1972.

Host stories
Several centuries after its founding, the Great Mosque of Kairouan is the subject of numerous descriptions by Arab historians and geographers in the Middle Ages. The stories concern mainly the different phases of construction and expansion of the sanctuary, and the successive contributions of many princes to the interior decoration (mihrab, minbar, ceilings, etc.). Among the authors who have written on the subject and whose stories have survived are Al-Bakri (Andalusian geographer and historian who died in 1094 and who devoted a sufficiently detailed account of the history of the mosque in his book Description of Septentrional Africa), Al-Nuwayri (historian who died in Egypt, 1332) and Ibn Nagi (scholar and historian of Kairouan who died around 1435).
On additions and embellishments made to the building by the Aghlabid emir Abu Ibrahim, Ibn Nagi gives the following account: « He built in the mosque of Kairouan the cupola that rises over the entrance to the central nave, together with the two colonnades which flank it from both sides, and the galleries were paved by him. He then made the mihrab. »
Among the Western travelers, poets and writers who visited Kairouan, some of them leave impressions and testimonies sometimes tinged with emotion or admiration on the mosque. From the eighteenth century, the French doctor and naturalist John Andrew Peyssonnel, conducting a study trip to 1724, during the reign of sovereign Al-Husayn Bey I, underlines the reputation of the mosque as a deemed centre of religious and secular studies: « The Great Mosque is dedicated to Uqba, where there is a famous college where we will study the remotest corners of this kingdom : are taught reading and writing of Arabic grammar, laws and religion. There are large rents for the maintenance of teachers. » 
At the same time, the doctor and Anglican priest Thomas Shaw (1692–1751), touring the Tunis Regency and passes through Kairouan in 1727, described the mosque as that: "which is considered the most beautiful and the most sacred of Berberian territories", evoking for example: "an almost unbelievable number of granite columns".
At the end of the nineteenth century, the French writer Guy de Maupassant expresses in his book La vie errante (The Wandering Life), his fascination with the majestic architecture of the Great Mosque of Kairouan as well as the effect created by countless columns: "The unique harmony of this temple consists in the proportion and the number of these slender shafts upholding the building, filling, peopling, and making it what it is, create its grace and greatness. Their colorful multitude gives the eye the impression of unlimited". Early in the twentieth century, the Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke describes his admiration for the minaret: « Is there a more beautiful than this still preserved old tower, the minaret, in Islamic architecture? In the history of Art, its three-storey minaret is considered such a masterpiece and a model among the most prestigious monuments of Muslim architecture. »

Architecture
General layout
The building is a vast slightly irregular quadrilateral covering some 9,000 m2. It is longer (127.60 metres) on the east side than the west (125.20 metres), and shorter on the north side (72.70 metres) than the south (78 metres). It consists mainly of an interior prayer hall to the south preceded by a large courtyard (sahn) to the north. The main minaret is centered on the north side of the courtyard.

Exterior
Enclosure
From the outside, the Great Mosque of Kairouan is a fortress-like building with its 1.90 metres thick massive ocher walls, a composite of well-worked stones with intervening courses of rubble stone and baked bricks. The corner towers measuring 4.25 metres on each side are buttressed with solid projecting supports. Structurally given the soft grounds subject to compaction, the buttressed towers added stability to the entire mosque. Despite the austere façades, the rhythmic patterns of buttresses and towering porches, some surmounted by cupolas, give the sanctuary a sense of striking sober grandeur.
Today, the enclosure of the Great Mosque of Kairouan is pierced by nine gates (six opening on the courtyard, two opening on the prayer hall and a ninth allows access to the maqsura) some of them, such as Bab Al-Ma (gate of water) located on the western façade, are preceded by salient porches flanked by buttresses and surmounted by ribbed domes based on square tholobate which are porting squinches with three vaults. However, Arab geographers and historians of the Middle Ages Al-Muqaddasi and Al-Bakri reported the existence, around the tenth and eleventh centuries, of about ten gates named differently from today. This reflects the fact that, unlike the rest of the mosque, the enclosure has undergone significant changes to ensure the stability of the building (adding many buttresses). Thus, some entries have been sealed, while others were kept.
During the thirteenth century, new gates were opened, the most remarkable, Bab Lalla Rihana dated from 1293, is located on the eastern wall of the enclosure. The monumental entrance, work of the Hafsid sovereign Abu Hafs `Umar ibn Yahya (reign from 1284 to 1295), is entered in a salient square, flanked by ancient columns supporting horseshoe arches and covered by a dome on squinches. The front façade of the porch has a large horseshoe arch relied on two marble columns and surmounted by a frieze adorned with a blind arcade, all crowned by serrated merlons (in a sawtooth arrangement). Despite its construction at the end of the thirteenth century, Bab Lalla Rihana blends well with all of the building mainly dating from the ninth century.

Courtyard
The courtyard is a vast trapezoidal area whose interior dimensions are approximately 67 by 52 metres. It is surrounded on all its four sides by a portico with double rows of arches, opened by slightly horseshoe arches supported by columns in various marbles, in granite or in porphyry, reused from Roman, Early Christian or Byzantine monuments particularly from Carthage. Access to the courtyard by six side entrances dating from the ninth and thirteenth centuries.
The portico on the south side of the courtyard, near the prayer hall, includes in its middle a large dressed stone pointed horseshoe arch which rests on ancient columns of white veined marble with Corinthian capitals. This porch of seven metres high is topped with a square base upon which rests a semi-spherical ribbed dome; the latter is ribbed with sharp-edged ribs. The intermediary area, the dodecagonal drum of the dome, is pierced by sixteen small rectangular windows set into rounded niches. The great central arch of the south portico, is flanked on each side by six rhythmically arranged horseshoe arches, which fall on twin columns backed by pillars. Overall, the proportions and general layout of the façade of the south portico, with its thirteen arches of which that in the middle constitutes a sort of triumphal arch crowned with a cupola, form an ensemble with "a powerful air of majesty", according to the French historian and sociologist Paul Sebag (1919–2004).

Details of the courtyard
The combination formed by the courtyard and the galleries that surround it covers an immense area whose dimensions are about 90 metres long and 72 metres in width. The northern part of the courtyard is paved with flagstones while the rest of the floor is almost entirely composed of white marble slabs. Near its centre is an horizontal sundial, bearing an inscription in naskhi engraved on the marble dating from 1258 AH (which corresponds to the year 1843) and which is accessed by a little staircase; it determines the time of prayers. The rainwater collector or impluvium, probably the work of the Muradid Bey Mohamed Bey al-Mouradi (1686–1696), is an ingenious system that ensures the capture (with the slightly sloping surface of the courtyard) then filtering stormwater at a central basin furnished with horseshoe arches sculpted in white marble. Freed from its impurities, the water flows into an underground cistern supported by seven-metre-high pillars. In the courtyard there are also several water wells some of which are placed side by side. Their edges, obtained from the lower parts of ancient cored columns, support the string grooves back the buckets.

Minaret
The minaret, which occupies the centre of the northern façade of the complex's enclosure, is 31.5 metres tall and is seated on a square base of 10.7 metres on each side. It is located inside the enclosure and does not have direct access from the outside. It consists of three tapering levels, the last of which is topped with a small ribbed dome that was most probably built later than the rest of the tower. The first and second stories are surmounted by rounded merlons which are pierced by arrowslits. The minaret served as a watchtower, as well as to call the faithful to prayer.
The door giving access to the minaret is framed by a lintel and jambs made of recycled carved friezes of antique origin. There are stone blocks from the Roman period that bear Latin inscriptions. Their use probably dates to the work done under the Umayyad governor Bishr ibn Safwan in about 725 AD, and they have been reused at the base of the tower. The greater part of the minaret dates from the time of the Aghlabid princes in the ninth century. It consists of regular layers of carefully cut rubble stone, thus giving the work a stylistically admirable homogeneity and unity.
The interior includes a staircase of 129 steps, surmounted by a barrel vault, which gives access to the terraces and the first tier of the minaret. The courtyard façade (or south façade) of the tower is pierced with windows that provide light and ventilation, while the other three façades—facing north, east and west—are pierced with small openings in the form of arrowslits. The minaret, in its present aspect, dates largely from the early ninth century, about 836 AD. It is the oldest minaret in the Muslim world, and it is also the world's oldest minaret still standing.
Due to its age and its architectural features, the minaret of the Great Mosque of Kairouan is the prototype for all the minarets of the western Islamic world: it served as a model in both North Africa and in Andalusia. Despite its massive form and austere decoration, it nevertheless presents a harmonious structure and a majestic appearance.

Domes
The Mosque has several domes, the largest being over the mihrab and the entrance to the prayer hall from the courtyard. The dome of the mihrab is based on an octagonal drum with slightly concave sides, raised on a square base, decorated on each of its three southern, eastern and western faces with five flat-bottomed niches surmounted by five semi-circular arches, the niche in the middle is cut by a lobed oculus enrolled in a circular frame. This dome, whose construction goes back to the first half of the ninth century (towards 836), is one of the oldest and most remarkable domes in the western Islamic world.

Interior
Prayer hall
The prayer hall is located on the southern side of the courtyard; and is accessed by 17 carved wooden doors. A portico with double row of arches precede the spacious prayer hall, which takes the shape of a rectangle of 70.6 metres in width and 37.5 metres' depth.
The hypostyle hall is divided into 17 aisles of eight bays, the central nave is wider, as well as the bay along the wall of the qibla. They cross with right angle in front of the mihrab, this device, named "T shape", which is also found in two Iraqi mosques in Samarra (around 847) has been adopted in many North African and Andalusian mosques where it became a feature.
The central nave, a sort of triumphal alley which leads to the mihrab, is significantly higher and wider than the other sixteen aisles of the prayer hall. It is bordered on each side of a double row of arches rested on twin columns and surmounted by a carved plaster decoration consisting of floral and geometric patterns.
Enlightened by chandeliers which are applied in countless small glass lamps, the nave opens into the south portico of the courtyard by a monumental delicately carved wooden door, made in 1828 under the reign of the Husainids. This sumptuous door, which has four leaves richly carved with geometric motifs embossed on the bottom of foliages and interlacing stars, is decorated at the typanum by a stylised vase from which emerge winding stems and leaves. The other doors of the prayer hall, some of which date from the time of the Hafsids, are distinguished by their decoration which consists essentially of geometric patterns (hexagonal, octagonal, rectangular patterns, etc.).

Columns and ceiling
In the prayer hall, the 414 columns of marble, granite or porphyry (among more than 500 columns in the whole mosque), taken from ancient sites in the country such as Sbeitla, Carthage, Hadrumetum and Chemtou, support the horseshoe arches. A legend says they could not count them without going blind. The capitals resting on the column shafts offer a wide variety of shapes and styles (Corinthian, Ionic, Composite, etc.). Some capitals were carved for the mosque, but others come from Roman or Byzantine buildings (dating from the second to sixth century) and were reused. According to the German archaeologist Christian Ewert, the special arrangement of reused columns and capitals surrounding the mihrab obeys to a well-defined program and would draw symbolically the plan of the Dome of the Rock. The shafts of the columns are carved in marble of different colors and different backgrounds. Those in white marble come from Italy, some shafts located in the area of the mihrab are in red porphyry imported from Egypt, while those made of greenish or pink marble are from quarries of Chemtou, in the north-west of current Tunisia. Although the shafts are of varying heights, the columns are ingeniously arranged to support fallen arches harmoniously. The height difference is compensated by the development of variable bases, capitals and crossbeams; a number of these crossbeams are in cedar wood. The wooden rods, which usually sink to the base of the transom, connect the columns together and maintain the spacing of the arches, thus enhancing the stability of all structures which support the ceiling of the prayer hall.

The covering of the prayer hall consists of painted ceilings decorated with vegetal motifs and two domes: one raised at the beginning of the central nave and the other in front of the mihrab. The latter, which its hemispherical cap is cut by 24 concave grooves radiating around the top, is based on ridged horns shaped shell and a drum pierced by eight circular windows which are inserted between sixteen niches grouped by two. The niches are covered with carved stone panels, finely adorned with characteristic geometric, vegetal and floral patterns of the Aghlabid decorative repertoire: shells, cusped arches, rosettes, vine-leaf, etc. From the outside, the dome of the mihrab is based on an octagonal drum with slightly concave sides, raised on a square base, decorated on each of its three southern, Easter and western faces with five flat-bottomed niches surmounted by five semi-circular arches, the niche in the middle is cut by a lobed oculus enrolled in a circular frame.
The painted ceilings are a unique ensemble of planks, beams and brackets, illustrating almost thousand years of the history of painting on wood in Tunisia. Wooden brackets offer a wide variety of style and decor in the shape of a crow or a grasshopper with wings or fixed, they are characterised by a setting that combines floral painted or carved, with grooves. The oldest boards date back to the Aghlabid period (ninth century) and are decorated with scrolls and rosettes on a red background consists of squares with concave sides in which are inscribed four-petaled flowers in green and blue, and those performed by the Zirid dynasty (eleventh century) are characterised by inscriptions in black kufic writing with gold rim and the uprights of the letters end with lobed florets, all on a brown background adorned with simple floral patterns.
The boards painted under the Hafsid period (during the thirteenth century) offers a floral decor consists of white and blue arches entwined with lobed green. The latest, dated the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries (mostly dating from the time of the Muradid Beys), are distinguished by an epigraphic decoration consists of long black and red texts on olive green background to those painted from 1618 to 1619, under the reign of Murad I Bey (1613–1631), while those back to the eighteenth century have inscriptions in white naskhi script on an orange background.

Mihrab
The mihrab, which indicates the Qibla (direction of Mecca), in front of which stands the imam during the prayer, is located in the middle of the southern wall of the prayer hall. It is formed by an oven-shaped niche framed by two marble columns and topped by a painted wooden half-cupola. The niche of the mihrab is two metres long, 4.5 metres high and 1.6 metres deep.
The mosque's mihrab, whose decor is a remarkable witness of Muslim art in the early centuries of Islam, is distinguished by its harmonious composition and the quality of its ornaments. Considered as the oldest example of concave mihrab, it dates in its present state to 862–863 AD.
It is surrounded at its upper part by 139 lusterware tiles (with a metallic sheen), each one is 21.1 centimetres square and they are arranged on the diagonal in a chessboard pattern. Divided into two groups, they are dated from the beginning of the second half of the ninth century but it is not determined with certainty whether they were made in Baghdad or in Kairouan by a Baghdadi artisan, the controversy over the origin of this precious collection agitates the specialists. These tiles are mainly decorated with floral and plant motifs (stylised flowers, palm leaves and asymmetrical leaves on bottom hatch and checkered) belong to two series: one polychrome characterised by a greater richness of tones ranging from light gold to light, dark or ocher yellow, and from brick-red to brown lacquer, the other monochrome is a beautiful luster that goes from smoked gold to green gold. The coating around them is decorated with blue plant motifs dating from the eighteenth century or the first half of the nineteenth century. The horseshoe arch of the mihrab, stilted and broken at the top, rest on two columns of red marble with yellow veins, which surmounted with Byzantine style capitals that carry two crossbeams carved with floral patterns, each one is decorated with a Kufic inscription in relief.
The wall of the mihrab is covered with 28 panels of white marble, carved and pierced, which have a wide variety of plant and geometric patterns including the stylised grape leaf, the flower and the shell. Behind the openwork hint, there is an oldest niche on which several assumptions were formulated. If one refers to the story of Al-Bakri, an Andalusian historian and geographer of the eleventh century, it is the mihrab which would be done by Uqba Ibn Nafi, the founder of Kairouan, whereas Lucien Golvin shares the view that it is not an old mihrab but hardly a begun construction which may serve to support marble panels and either goes back to work of Ziadet Allah I (817–838) or to those of Abul Ibrahim around the years 862–863. Above the marble cladding, the mihrab niche is crowned with a half dome-shaped vault made of manchineel bentwood. Covered with a thick coating completely painted, the concavity of the arch is decorated with intertwined scrolls enveloping stylised five-lobed vine leaves, three-lobed florets and sharp clusters, all in yellow on midnight blue background.

Minbar
The minbar, situated on the right of the mihrab, is used by the imam during the Friday or Eids sermons, is a staircase-shaped pulpit with an upper seat, reached by eleven steps, and measuring 3.93 metres' length to 3.31 metres in height. Dated from the ninth century (about 862) and erected under the reign of the sixth Aghlabid ruler Abul Ibrahim (856–863), it is made in teak wood imported from India. Among all the pulpits of the Muslim world, it is certainly the oldest example of minbar still preserved today. Probably made by cabinetmakers of Kairouan (some researchers also refer to Baghdad), it consists of an assembly of more than 300 finely carved wood pieces with an exceptional ornamental wealth (vegetal and geometric patterns refer to the Umayyad and Abbasid models), among which about 90 rectangular panels carved with plenty of pine cones, grape leaves, thin and flexible stems, lanceolate fruits and various geometric shapes (squares, diamonds, stars, etc.). The upper edge of the minbar ramp is adorned with a rich and graceful vegetal decoration composed of alternately arranged foliated scrolls, each one containing a spread vine-leaf and a cluster of grapes. In the early twentieth century, the minbar had a painstaking restoration. Although it has existed for more than eleven centuries, all panels, with the exception of nine, are originals and are in a good state of conservation, the fineness of the execution of the minbar makes it a great masterpiece of Islamic wood carving referring to Paul Sebag. This old chair of the ninth century is still in its original location, next to the mihrab.

Maqsura
The maqsura, located near the minbar, consists of a fence bounding a private enclosure that allows the sovereign and his senior officials to follow the solemn prayer of Friday without mingling with the faithful. Jewel of the art of woodwork produced during the reign of the Zirid prince Al-Mu'izz ibn Badis and dated from the first half of the eleventh century, it is considered the oldest still in place in the Islamic world. It is a cedar wood fence finely sculpted and carved on three sides with various geometric motifs measuring 2.8 metres tall, eight metres long and six metres wide. Its main adornment is a frieze that crowns calligraphy, the latter surmounted by a line of pointed openwork merlons, features an inscription in flowery kufic character carved on the background of interlacing plants. Carefully executed in relief, it represents one of the most beautiful epigraphic bands of Islamic art.
The library is near located, accessible by a door which the jambs and the lintel are carved in marble, adorned with a frieze of floral decoration. The library window is marked by an elegant setting that has two columns flanking the opening, which is a horseshoe arch topped by six blind arches and crowned by a series of berms sawtooth.

Artworks
The Mosque of Uqba, one of the few religious buildings of Islam has remained intact almost all of its architectural and decorative elements, is due to the richness of its repertoire which is a veritable museum of Islamic decorative art and architecture. Most of the works on which rests the reputation of the mosque are still conserved in situ while a certain number of them have joined the collections of the Raqqada National Museum of Islamic Art; Raqqada is located about ten kilometres southwest of Kairouan.
From the library of the mosque comes a large collection of calligraphic scrolls and manuscripts, the oldest dating back to the second half of the ninth century. This valuable collection, observed from the late nineteenth century by the French orientalists Octave Houdas and René Basset who mention in their report on their scientific mission in Tunisia published in the Journal of African correspondence in 1882, comprises according to the inventory established at the time of the Hafsids (c. 1293–1294) several Qur'ans and books of fiqh that concern mainly the Maliki fiqh and its sources. These are the oldest fund of Maliki legal literature to have survived.

Among the finest works of this series, the pages of the Blue Qur'an, currently exhibited at Raqqada National Museum of Islamic Art, from a famous Qur'an in the second half of the fourth century of the Hijrah (the tenth century) most of which is preserved in Tunisia and the rest scattered in museums and private collections worldwide. Featuring kufic character suras are written in gold on vellum dyed with indigo, they are distinguished by a compact graph with no marks for vowels. The beginning of each surah is indicated by a band consisting of a golden stylised leafy foliage, dotted with red and blue, while the verses are separated by silver rosettes. Other scrolls and calligraphic Qur'ans, as that known as the Hadinah's Qur'an, copied and illuminated by the calligrapher Ali ibn Ahmad al-Warraq for the governess of the Zirid prince Al-Muizz ibn Badis at about 1020 AD, were also in the library before being transferred to Raqqada museum. This collection is a unique source for studying the history and evolution of calligraphy of medieval manuscripts in the Maghreb, covering the period from the ninth to the eleventh century.
Other works of art such as the crowns of light (circular chandeliers) made in cast bronze, dating from the Fatimid-Zirid period (around the tenth to the early eleventh century), originally belonged to the furniture of the mosque. These polycandelons, now scattered in various Tunisian museums including Raqqada, consist of three chains supporting a perforated brass plate, which has a central circular ring around which radiate 18 equidistant poles connected by many horseshoe arches and equipped for each of two landmarks flared. The three chains, connected by a suspension ring, are each fixed to the plate by an almond-shaped finial. The crowns of light are marked by Byzantine influence to which the Kairouanese artisan brought the specificities of Islamic decorative repertoire (geometric and floral motifs).

Role in Muslim civilisation
At the time of its greatest splendor, between the ninth and eleventh centuries AD, Kairouan was one of the greatest centres of Islamic civilisation and its reputation as a hotbed of scholarship covered the entire Maghreb. During this period, the Great Mosque of Kairouan was both a place of prayer and a centre for teaching Islamic sciences under the Maliki current. One may conceivably compare its role to that of the University of Paris during the Middle Ages.
In addition to studies on the deepening of religious thought and Maliki jurisprudence, the mosque also hosted various courses in secular subjects such as mathematics, astronomy, medicine and botany. The transmission of knowledge was assured by prominent scholars and theologians which included Sahnun ibn Sa'id and Asad ibn al-Furat, eminent jurists who contributed greatly to the dissemination of the Maliki thought, Ishaq ibn Imran and Ibn al-Jazzar in medicine, Abu Sahl al-Kairouani and Abd al-Monim al-Kindi in mathematics. Thus, the mosque, headquarters of a prestigious university with a large library containing a large number of scientific and theological works, was the most remarkable intellectual and cultural centre in North Africa during the ninth, tenth and eleventh centuries.

See also
Al-Zaytuna Mosque
University of al-Qarawiyyin
List of the oldest mosques
History of medieval Arabic and Western European domes

References
Citations
Bibliography
Djelloul, Néji (2000). Kairouan, the Great Mosque. Contraste Editions. ISBN 9789973977908.
Sebag, Paul (1965). Great Mosque of Kairouan. New York: Macmillan.

Further reading
Bloom, Jonathan M. (2020). Architecture of the Islamic West: North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula, 700-1800. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-21870-1. (See pages 27–33 in particular, plus later mentions)
Anderson, Glaire D.; Fenwick, Corisande; Rosser-Owen, Mariam, eds. (2018). The Aghlabids and Their Neighbors: Art and Material Culture in Ninth-Century North Africa. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-35566-8. (See chapters 9 to 12 in particular)
Ettinghausen, Richard; Grabar, Oleg; Grabar, Jenkins-Madina; Marilyn (2001). Islamic Art and Architecture 650-1250: 2nd Edition. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-08869-4. (See pages 33–35 in particular, plus later mentions)
Bloom, Jonathan M. (2013). The minaret. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0748637256. OCLC 856037134. (See pages 117–123 in particular)

External links

Great Mosque of Kairouan (Qantara Mediterranean Heritage)
Video of the mihrab of the Great Mosque of Kairouan


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 4,374
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%AC%D8%A7%D9%85%D8%B9_%D8%B9%D9%82%D8%A8%D8%A9_%D8%A8%D9%86_%D9%86%D8%A7%D9%81%D8%B9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

جامع عقبة بن نافع أو جامع القيروان الكبير هو مسجد بناه عقبة بن نافع في مدينة القيروان التي أسسها بعد فتح إفريقية (تونس حاليًا) على يد جيشه. كان الجامع حين إنشائه على أغلب الظن بسيطاً صغير المساحة تستند أسقفه على الأعمدة مباشرة، دون عقود تصل بين الأعمدة والسقف. وحرص الذين جددوا بناءه فيما بعد على هيئته العامة، وقبلته ومحرابه، وتوسع وزيد في مساحتهِ عدة مرات ولقي اهتمام الأمراء والخلفاء والعلماء في شتى مراحل التاريخ الإسلامي، حتى أصبح معلماً تاريخياً بارزاً ومهما.
وبناء الجامع في شكلهِ وحجمهِ وطرازهِ المعماري الذي نراه اليوم يعود أساسا إلى عهد
الدولة الأغلبية في القرن الثالث هجري أي القرن التاسع ميلادي وقد تواصلت أعمال الصيانة والتحسينات خصوصا في ظل الحكم الصنهاجي ثم في بداية العهد الحفصي.
ويعتبر المسجد الجامع بالقيروان من أضخم المساجد في الغرب الإسلامي وتبلغ مساحتهُ الإجمالية حوالي 9700 متر مربع، وبقياس ما يقارب 126 متر طولا و 77 متر عرضا، وحرم الصلاة فيهِ واسع ومساحته كبيرة يستند إلى مئآت الأعمدة الرخامية هذا إلى جانب صحن فسيح الأرجاء تحيط بهِ الأروقة ومع ضخامة مساحته يعد أيضا تحفة معمارية وأحد أروع المعالم الإسلامية.

جامع القيروان يحتوي على كنوز قيمة فالمنبر يعتبر تحفة فنية رائعة وهو مصنوع من خشب الساج المنقوش ويعتبر أقدم منبر في العالم الإسلامي ما زال محتفظا به في مكانه الأصلي ويعود إلى القرن الثالث للهجرة أي التاسع ميلادي.
كذلك مقصورة المسجد النفيسة التي تعود إلى القرن الخامس هجري أي الحادي عشر ميلادي وهي أيضا
أقدم مقصورة ما زالت محتفظة بعناصرها الزخرفية الأصلية.
الشكل الخارجي للجامع يوحي للناظر أنه حصن ضخم إذ أن جدران المسجد سميكة ومرتفعة وشدت بدعامات واضحة.
ومن آياته أن جمعت بقايا هذه الأمم السالفة لتؤلّف بيتا يذكر فيها اسم الله. وهو ما يضفي على جامع القيروان مسحة إنسانية تؤهّله ليصبح تراثا عالميا قد أسهمت في تشييده حضارات متتالية، وهو يعكس بذلك تاريخ إفريقية على امتداد ثلاثة آلاف سنة. فما من أمير أو خليفة أو سلطان يسعى لجميل الذكر وحسن الخلود ويبتغي ثواب ربه إلا وقد التمس وجها لاعمار هذا الجامع أو ترميمه وتحسين مظهره. فهذا الجامع مرآة ناصعة لتجليات الحضارة العربية الإسلامية في بلادنا.
وجامع القيروان يمثّل الوجه المتألّق للعمارة القيروانية التي ظلّت من أبرز روافد العمارة المغربيّة والأندلسية عبر التاريخ حيث أصبح جامع عقبة بن نافع النموذج السائد والمثال الذي تحتذي به الجوامع المغربيّة عامّة والتونسيّة خاصّة. وتقع القيروان في تونس على بُعد 156 كم من العاصمة تونس. وكلمة القيروان كلمة فارسية دخلت إلى العربية، وتعني مكان السلاح ومحط الجيش أو استراحة القافلة وموضع اجتماع الناس في الحرب.

تاريخ الجامع
مثلما بُنيت مدينة القيروان بعد الفتح الإسلامي لشمال أفريقيا، بُني جامعها الكبير ويسمونه أيضا جامع عقبة بن نافع نسبة للقائد الأموي الذي اخضع القيروان كليا في حملته الثالثة عليها عام 665م. ويقال أن المدينة شيدت على أنقاض حصن للروم ودام بناؤها خمس سنوات انتهى عام 670 م، بعد عام بني الجامع الواقع في الطرف الشمالي من المدينة، فليس «أقدم من المدينة جامعها» كما هو متداول. والحال أنهما الاثنان ولدا في زمن واحد قبل ثلاثة عشر قرنا.
إن من أبرز ما جادت به العبقريّة التونسية عبر العصور: جامع عقبة بن نافع بالقيروان. وهو يعتبر من أروع وأجل مآثر الحضارة العربية الإسلامية في العالم. وقد ظل هذا المعلم الشامخ يبهر الناظرين والدارسين بتناسق عمارته وتآلف عناصره وثراء رصيد الفني وتلألأ أنواره. فمن أعلى صومعته صاح الرسام العالمي بول كلي « Paul Klee » الآن أصبحت رساما وذلك لفرط ما سرى فيه من إحساس بالظل النور. واعتبر الأديب الفرنسي قي دي منبسان الذي زار القيروان في أواخر القرن التاسع عشر جامع عقبة بن نافع من روائع الدنيا لما ينطوي عليه من إبراز للعبقريّة الإسلامية التي استطاعت نحت روحها وعقيدتها الدينية من خلال شتات من المواد الصخرية المتناثرة في إطلال بائدة لأمم غابرة. فالمتأمل في العناصر التي اتّخذت في بناء جامع القيروان يقف على مجموعة فريدة من الأعمدة والتيجان والوسادات المستجلبة من الخرائب الرومانية والبيزنطيّة آثار حضارات تلاشت واندثرت فيتذكر ارم ذات العماد التي لم يخلق مثلها في البلاد وثمود الذين جابوا الصخر بالواد، كل هذه الحضارات انقرضت ولم يبق إلا وجه ربك الواحد الأحد.
أول من جدد بناء الجامع بعد عقبة هو حسان بن النعمان الغساني الذي هدمه كله وأبقى المحراب وأعاد بناءه بعد أن وسعه وقوى بنيانه وكان ذلك في عام 80 هـ.
في عام 105 هـ طلب الخليفة الأموي هشام بن عبد الملك من واليه على القيروان بشر بن صفران أن يزيد في بناء المسجد ويوسعه، فأشترى بشر أرض شمالي المسجد وضمها إليه، وأضاف لصحن المسجد مكانا للوضوء وبنى مئذنة للمسجد في منتصف جداره الشمالي عند بئر تسمى بئر الجنان. وبعدها بخمسين عاما (155 هـ) قام يزيد بن حاتم والي أبي جعفر المنصور على أفريقية بإصلاح وترميم وزخرفة المسجد.
في عام 221 هـ هدم ثاني أمراء الأغلبيين زيادة الله بن الأغلب أجزاء من الجامع لتوسعته كما رفع سقفه وبنى قبة مزخرفة بلوحات رخامية على أسطوانة المحراب. أراد زيادة الله أن يهدم المحراب إلا أن فقهاء القيروان عارضوه وقالوا له: «إن من تقدمك توقفوا عن ذلك لما كان واضعه عقبة بن نافع ومن كان معه». قال بعض المعماريين: «أنا أدخله بين حائطين فيبقى دون أن يظهر في الجامع أثر لغيرك»، فأخذ بهذا الرأي وأمر ببناء محراب جديد بالرخام الأبيض المخرم الذي يطل منه الناظر على محراب عقبة الأساسي.
في عام 248 هـ زين أحمد بن محمد الأغلبي المنبر وجدار المحراب بلوحات رخامية وقرميد خزفي. وفي عام 261 هـ وسع أحمد الأغلبي الجامع وبنى قبة باب البهو وأقام مجنبات تدور حول الصحن. وفي هذه المرحلة يعتقد أن الجامع قد وصل إلى أقصى درجات جماله.
في عام 441 هـ قام المعز بن باديس بترميم المسجد وتجديد بنائه وبنى لهُ مقصورة خشبية لا تزال موجودة إلى يومنا هذا بجانب محراب المسجد. ثم جدد الحفصيون المسجد مرة أخرى بعد الغزوة الهلالية.
جامع عقبة بن نافع بناه القائد عقبة بن نافع (رضي الله عنه) في مدينة القيروان التي أسسها بعد فتح تونس على يد جيشه المقدام.. كان بسيطاً صغير المساحة، تستند أسقفه على الأعمدة مباشرة، دون عقود تصل بين الأعمدة والسقف.
وحرص الذين جددوا بناءه فيما بعد على هيئته العامة، وقبلته ومحرابه، وقد تمت زيادة مساحته كثيراً، ولقي اهتمام الأمراء والخلفاء والعلماء في شتى مراحل التاريخ الإسلامي، حتى أصبح مَعلماً تاريخياً بارزاً ومهماً في تاريخنا العظيم.
الشكل الخارجي للجامع يوحي للناظر أنه حصن ضخم، بسبب جدرانه السميكة والمرتفعة التي شُّدت بدعامات واضحة للعيان.
أول من جدده حسان بن النعمان الغساني سنة 80هـ، فقد هدمه كله وأبقى على المحراب وأعاد بناءه بعد أن وسعه وقوى بنيانه.
وفي عام 105 هـ قام الخليفة الأموي هشام بن عبد الملك بالطلب من واليه على القيروان بشر بن صفران أن يزيد في بناء المسجد ويوسعه، فقام بشر بشراء أرض شمالي المسجد وضمها إليه، وأضاف لصحن المسجد مكاناً للوضوء.
وبنى مئذنة للمسجد في منتصف جداره الشمالي عند بئر تسمى بئر الجنان، وبعدها بخمسين عاماً (155هـ) قام يزيد بن حاتم والي أبو جعفر المنصور على أفريقية بإصلاح وترميم وزخرفة المسجد.
تعتبر مئذنة جامع عقبة من أجمل المآذن التي بناها المسلمون في أفريقيا، تتكون من ثلاث طبقات مربعة الشكل، وفوق الطبقات الثلاث قبة مفصصة، ويصل ارتفاع المئذنة إلى 31.5 متراً.
وتقع في الحائط المواجه لجدار القبلة في أقصى الصحن المكشوف، ويدور بداخلها درج ضيق يرتفع كلما ارتفع المبنى متناسباً مع حجمه، ويضيق كلما ارتفعنا لأعلى.
في المسجد ست قباب وهي: قبة المحراب، وقبة باب البهو، وقبتان تعلوان مدخل بيت الصلاة، وقبة تعلو المجنبة الغربية للمسجد، وقبة في أعلى المئذنة.
لذلك فهو تحفة فنية نادرة الوجود، تدل على عظمة أجدادنا في فن العمار الهندسي الرائع.

مقاييس الجامع
المسجد اليوم لا يزال يحتفظ بمقاييسه الأولى التي كان عليها أيام إبراهيم بن أحمد الاغلبي، يبلغ طوله 126 متراً وعرضه 77 مترا. وطول بيت الصلاة فيه 70 مترا وعرضه حوالي 38 مترا وصحنه المكشوف طوله 67 وعرضه 56 مترا. ولهذا الصحن مجنبات عرض كل منها نحو ستة أمتار وربع المتر.
يغطي بيت الصلاة ثلث مساحة المسجد تقريبا.
يوحي الجامع للناظر أنه حصن ضخم. إذ أن جدرانه سميكة ومرتفعة وشدت بدعامات واضحة. ويتميّز تخطيط الجامع ببساطته فهو يتكوّن من مستطيل منحرف ومبنى في اتّجاه الطول اقتداء بالجوامع العراقيّة ويبلغ طوله بين 127،6و 125.2 وعرضه بين 78م عند جدار القبلة و71.70م. ويُعَدُّ بذلك من أكبر المساجد الجامعة الباقية في الإسلام، وأعظمها مظهرًا. وأبعاد جامع القيروان تخضع إلى العدد الذهبي 62.1 المتعارف لدى الإغريق ثمّ الرومان من بعدهم. وهذا العدد هو المعتمد في التدليل على حسن تناسق الأبعاد الهندسيّة لمعلم ما وتناغم أحجامه.

المئذنة والقباب
المئذنة
تعتبر مئذنة جامع عقبة من أقدم وأجمل المآذن التي بناها المسلمون في أفريقيا. وتعد جميع المآذن التي بنيت بعدها في بلاد المغرب العربي على شاكلتها ولا تختلف عنها إلا قليلا، ومن المآذن التي تشبهها مئذنة جامع صفاقس، ومآذن جوامع تلمسان وأغادير والرباط وجامع القرويين، هذا غير بعض مآذن مساجد الشرق كمئذنة مسجد الجيوشي في مصر.

تتكون المئذنة من ثلاث طبقات كلها مربعة الشكل، والطبقة الثانية أصغر من الأولى، والثالثة أصغر من الثانية، وفوق الطبقات الثلاث قبة مفصصة. يصل ارتفاع المئذنة الكلية إلى 31.5 متراً.
تقع المئذنة في الحائط المواجه لجدار القبلة في أقصى الصحن المكشوف، وضلع طبقتها الأولى المربعة من أسفل يزيد على 10.5 متر مع ارتفاع يضاهي 19 مترا، وتم بناء الأمتار الثلاثة والنصف الأولى منه بقطع حجرية مصقولة، بينما شيد بقية جسم المئذنة بقطع حجرية مستطيلة الشكل كقوالب الأجر.
الطابق الثاني من المئذنة مزين بطاقات ثلاث مغلقة ومعقودة في كل وجه من أوجه المنارة، في حين زين كل وجه من أوجه الطابق الثالث بنافذة حولها طاقتان مغلقتان، ويوجد في أعلى الجدار الأعلى من كل طابق شرفات على هيئة عقود متصلة ومفرغة وسطها.
يدور بداخل المئذنة درج ضيق يرتفع كلما ارتفع المبنى متناسبا مع حجمه حيث يضيق كلما ارتفعنا لأعلى. يعتقد أن هذه المنارة لم تبن دفعة واحدة، حتى إن الجزء الأول الأضخم منها بني في عهد الخليفة الأموي هشام بن عبد الملك أيام واليه على القيروان بشر بن صفوان، ثم أكملت عملية البناء بعد مدة طويلة حيث بني الجزءان الثاني والثالث فوق تلك القاعدة الضخمة.

القباب
في مسجد عقبة ست قباب:

قبة المحراب وتعد أقدم قبة بنيت في المغرب الإسلامي.
قبة باب البهو على مدخل البلاط الأوسط من جهة الصحن، وقد تم الاعتناء بها وزخرفتها بشكل كبير، وأعطت توازنا على بيت الصلاة. بعدها، أصبح بناء قبتين في بيوت الصلاة قاعدة ثابتة في مساجد المغرب الإسلامي.
قبتان تعلوان مدخل بيت الصلاة في الشرق والغرب.
قبة تعلو المجنبة الغربية للمسجد.
قبة في أعلى المئذنة.

زخارف الجامع
من أفضل زخارف الجامع زخارف المحراب والقبة التي فوقه. تكسو المحراب زخارف منقوشة على ألواح رخامية يوجد فيها فراغات تسمح بدخول الضوء وقد زين جدار المحراب بمربعات من الخزف ذو البريق المعدني المذهب. تغطي القبة زخارف نباتية على شكل ساق متوسطة أو فروع متموجة تتدلى منها عناقيد من العنب.
وتغطي القبة زخارف نباتية على شكل ساق متوسطة أو فروع متموجة تتدلى منها عناقيد من العنب، أما المنبر فهو محفور على الخشب وفيه زخارف هندسية ونباتية، ويعود عهده إلى عام 248هـ.
أما المنبر فهو محفور على الخشب وفيه زخارف هندسية ونباتية، ومصنوع من خشب الساج المستورد من الهند ويتكون من أكثر من 300 لوحة
منقوشه تتميز بلونها الزخرفي الفريد وهذا المنبر من أبدع ما أنتجته المدرسة القيروانية
في ظل الحكم الأغلبي ويعود عهده إلى عام 248 هـ.
وتعتبر المقصورة التي توجد على يمين المنبر من أقدم المقصورات في العالم الإسلامي
ويعود عهدها إلى القرن الخامس هجري أي الحادي عشر ميلادي وقد أمر بصنعها الأمير المعز بن باديس من سلالة بنو زيري.
و المقصورة تحفة فنية من خشب الأرز المحفور والمصقول بشكل بديع وقد زينت بنقيشة
كتبت بالخط الكوفي المورق تعد من أروع النماذج الخطية في الفن الإسلامي.
قرابة خمسة وخمسين مجموعة مختلفة النحت والزخرفة والتخريم لتيجان الأعمدة في الأروقة المحيطة بصحن المسجد من المرمر الأبيض والأبيض المشوب بالخضرة والحجر الجيري الأبيض والأبيض المائل للصفرة من مناطق مختلفة، من آثار رومانية وكنائس بيزنطية.. لم اعثر على تاجين متجاورين متشابهين عدا أعمدة باب البهو التي بنيت فيما بعد، في القرن الحادي عشر. ماذا دار في خلد المعماري وهو ينأى بعيدا عن التكرار ؟ ألم يكن ابن صحراء تتكرر مشاهدها كل يوم منذ الولادة حتى الممات، أو ابن مدينة لا يختلف فيها بيت عن جاره ولا نهج عن نهج بما يفضي إليه ؟ كان يدرك أن اللاتماثل واستواء الأضداد إنما هو طريق يفضي إلى جمال هارب من ألفة السياق يكمن في أخاديد الحجر واختلال القياس وغربة التاريخ... جمال يجمع تاجا من مرمر مزينا بصليب وعمودا مزينا بطرة مربعة منقوش عليها (لا قوة إلا بالله وعليه توكلنا) كان واثقا أنهما يرفعان سقف بيت الله بنفس الكفاءة. انه برهان على حقيقة كانت تعنيه بقدر أكبر مما تعنينا الآن.

روعة الهندسة المعمارية
يكشف لنا الجامع الكبير في القيروان عن عمارة ذات منطق مغاير وذائقة تستبطن بدائية ثقافة شعبية، ثقافة غير مشذبة أهملت ترف العمارة المدنية أو على الأرجح أنها تجهل وسائل تحقيقها. عزز ذلك الواقع أن الحجارة والأعمدة التي جلبت من مختلف المناطق التونسية هي بقايا آثار رومانية وبيزنطية وكنائس هدمت في وقتها، فهي مواد مستعملة سابقا بعضها قد تكسر وتشوه شكله بفعل الهدم والنقل البدائي. لقد أدت مجموعة المواد المختلفة وغير المتماثلة إلى نتائج لم تكن في الحسبان، نتائج لا تنتمي لإسم بعينه ولا لمادة محددة ولا لزمن محسوب، حتى أن الجامع ذاته الذي شيده عقبة بن نافع لم يبق منه ذكرى سوى محراب يختفي خلف المحراب الذي بناه بنو الأغلب (يمكن مشاهدة محراب عقبة بن نافع عبر خروم المحراب القائم حاليا). إنها نتائج لا يمكن أن تركن في زاوية معينة، إذ أسهمت في صياغتها عوامل لا حصر لها مجهول أغلبها.
وقل في المساجد القديمة مسجد ينافس بصحنه صحن جامع القيروان بقياس أضلاع شكله شبه المربع، وكل ذلك الفضاء الفسيح المبلط برخام حديث لا يكاد يكون للمزاولة الشمسية الموجودة فيه فوق مبنى صغير الحجم، وكذلك فوهات المواجل الخمس المكونة في أصل تيجان أعمدة رخامية عتيقة ضخمة. وعند مسيل الماء في الصحن تشاهد تلك المصفاة المربعة ذات الدوائر والسطوح المتفاوتة لتصفية مياه الأمطار المنحدرة إلى الخزانات الواسعة الموجودة فيه تحت الصحن.

و للجامع ثمانية مداخل، أربعة في الجانب الشرقي وأربعة في الجانب الغربي وواحد من هذه المداخل فقط في الجانب الشرقي له بهو، أما الرابع فهو من الشمال المعروف بأسم باب الله رجانا المنسوب - حسب النقش - إلى أبي حفص في عام 693هـ -1294م والثلاثة أبواب الأخرى قائمة في ارتدادات مقنطرة ضحلة مختلفة العمق ومحاطة بأعمدة نصف ظاهرة، أقواس المدخلين الأولين متشابهة تماما، كلاهما ذو قالب زخرفي ممتد حولها ويشكل عقدة في القمة، ثم يمتد حتى يشكل إطارا مستطيلا والنتيجة هو أنه شكل نسخة طبق الأصل عن قوس باب الله رجانا. أما الباب الثلاث فإن حجارته مستوردة تماما بالطلاء الكلسي ولكن قوسه من النوع المدبب البسيط، الذي لا يشبه بأي شكل أقواس الجزء القديم من المسجد.
وتوجد أمام الأبواب جهة الجانب الغربي بهو صغير مقنطر في الباب الأول والرابع وآخر متصالب والأخير بسيط مؤلف من العوارض الخشبية. والباب الوحيد الخالي نسبيا من الكسوة والطلاء الأبيض هو المدخل الرئيسي للحرم المعروف باسم السلطات مقابل باب الله رجانا. وإلى الجنوب من الباب في الجانب الغربي يوجد ارتداد آخر بعرض (2.75) مترا يعلوه قوس دائري حدودي وهذان المدخلان لابد وأنهما كانا على جانب الواجهة القديمة للحرم بما هو الحال في مسجدي دمشق وقرطبة.

تقنية الأعمدة
كانت الأعمدة من أهم الأشياء التي تناولها الفن الإسلامي، وقد اتخذت تيجانًاوعقودًا مدبَّبَة، وروابط خشبية، حتى إنه ظهر ما يُعْرَفُ بعلم عقود الأبنية، وقدأصبحت أقواس حدوة الفرس تدلُّ على الفنِّ المعماري الإسلامي، وإن وُجِدَتِ الأقواس قبلاً إلاَّ أنه قد تَغَيَّر شكلها على يد المسلمين.
أسهمت الحجارة والأعمدة متباينة المنشأ المستعملة مرارا في مضاعفة حجة العمارة على تأكيد نظامها الخاص. فعبر ما يقارب سبعة قرون من الترميم وإعادة البناء واستخدام البواقي من المواد تم الحصول على مبنى فريد لا يشبه أي مبنى آخر. كيف نفسر وجود كتلة صخرية على الضلع الخارجي للدعامة الثانية ما قبل الأخيرة من جهة بيت الصلاة؟ حجر بيزنطي منحوت يزن أكثر من طن بدا كأنه سيسقط أرضا نبت على الجدار، لا تدري مغزاه، ولا وظيفته الانشائية، فلا تراه الا نزوة، نزوة متطامنة مع استخدام ما تحت يديه من مواد كلها وايجاد مواقع لها في نظامه الخاص.

تقنية المقرنصات
كذلك كانت المقرنصات من أبرز خصائص الفنِّ المعماري الإسلامي، وتعني الأجزاء المتدلِّيَة من السقف، والمقرنصات منها داخلية وخارجية: انتشرت
الداخلية في المحاريب والسقوف، وكانت الخارجية في صحون المآذن وأبواب القصور والشرفات.

المشربيات
كما كان من مظاهر الفنِّ المعماري الإسلامي الظاهرة بناء مشربيات البيوت مخرمةً أو مزخرفة، وتسمَّى قمرية إذا كانت مستديرة، أو شمسية إذا كانت غير مستديرة، أو حتى شيشًا، وهي من خشب خُرِطَ كستائر للنوافذ، من فوائدها أنها تُخَفِّفُ حِدَّة الضوء، وتُمَكِّنُ النساء من مشاهدة مَنْ بالخارج دون أن يراهنَّ أَحَدٌ، وقد أصبح ذلك طابع البيوت الإسلامية.

تأثيرات الفن الأغلبي والفاطمي
زاوجت القيروان في تخطيطها بين خصوصية موقعها وعبقرية أهلها أهمية مركزها الديني والحضاري، وقد شابهت في عموم رسومها وبنيانها ما كان ينبغي أن تشبه فيه سائر العواصم والمدن العربية وكما انطبعت الصناعة الأغلبية الغالبة بجامع القيروان بالتأثيرات الفنية الشرقية والبغدادية فإننا نلاحظ تأثير الفن الفاطمي المصري الواضح في الزخارف الملونة على خشب سقوف عدد من الأروقة. ماعدا سقف الأسكوب القبلي الكبير فهو السقف الوحيد الأصلي الباقي بالجامع، حيث لا تزال ألوانه القزحية تحتفظ بجاذبيتها وتناسبها عبر الأشكال الزهرية التي تحليه. ويختص جامع القيروان بسقوفه الخشبية المدهونة والمصقولة الراجعة إلى فترات تاريخية مختلفة تمتد بشريطها الكتابي المورق على ما يربو عن الألف سنة. وهي تنضاف إلى المقصورة الفريدة التي بناها المعز باديس باريس بجامع القيروان حوالي (425هـ) وهي مجموعة متكاملة تسمح بتتبع خطوات نشأة الفن التجريدي المعاصر.

المحراب
ويعد المحراب تحفة المحاريب الإسلامية في أدنى تفصيل من تفصيلاته وهو الآن أقدمها على الإطلاق. وقد صنعت نصف القبة الدائرية بأعلاه من ألواح متراوحة من أفخر خشب الساج. وهي تمتاز بزخرفتها الفنية الرائعة التي حافظت على تكوينها الزاهي وتذهيبها البديع رغم تقادم الزمن مما يدل على المواد المختارة المستعملة في ذلك. وليس لتلك الأوراق المخمسة والعناقيد المذببة في سمائها من حد لتشابكها وتعانقها إلا حدود الرحلة الفنية التي انتهت بها يد الفنان القيرواني. ومهما يطلب من سمات لهذه القبة في معالم فنية مماثلة في الشرق الأموي أو الغرب البيزنطي لعهدها فإنها تبقى نسيجا وحدها. ويقوم العقد المنصف للقبة على ساريتين حمراوين من الرخام الرفيع يعلوهما تاجان من أجمل ما نقشت التيجان. وفوقهما مسطحان يتوسطهما العقد كتب على رخام كل منهما بالخط الكوفي القيرواني الأصيل: «بسم الله، كفى بالله حسيبا».
ويزين أعلى جدران المحراب وعقده مربعات زخرفية أو (قراميد) تمتاز ببريقها المعدني وعددها (130) قطعة. ولا يعرف أقدم من نوعها في الإسلام. ويقال لها باللسان القيرواني (جليزيات) وقد استقدمها من العراق أبو إبراهيم أحمد الأغلبي وزينتها واضحة التأثير بالتقاليد الفارسية. انها في جبين المحراب وطوقه حلية فريدة.

المنبر
وعلى يمين المحراب يقوم «أجمل وأعرق منبر في الإسلام». وهو من خشب الساج المجلوب، أجزاؤه التي يزيد على الثلاثمائة لوحة منقوشة نقشا دقيقا يذهل المقارن بينهما لاستقلال كل واحدة منها، رغم كثرتها، بزينة مخصوصة. وكلها متماسكة من عجب بدون غراء ولا مسامير، لكن بمواشير خشبية متداخلة. وفي مدينة بيونيه، عاصمة السلاجقة منبر يحاكي منبر القيروان ويقاربه في التاريخ. ويضفي ضوء النهار المتعاكس على نقاش تلك اللوحات جمالا باهرا. ولعلها هي الخزف البراق بأعلى المحراب صناعة بغدادية قيروانية متوأمة للصلة القوية التي كانت في عهد الأغالبة بين العراق وإفريقية.

المقصورة المعزية
وحذو المحراب الساق بالساق تمتد المقصورة المعزية، نسبة إلى المعز لدين الله الصنهاجي الذي بناه في سنة (431هـ / 1023م) وأصلحت بعد ستة قرون من ذلك التاريخ. ويقدر طولها بثمانية أمتار وارتفاعها بـ (2.80 متر). وأحد طوليها حائط القبلة نفسه وتفتح من ناحيته على بيت الإمام. وأما الباب الذي يفضي إليه من جهة بيت الصلاة فله دفتان كبيرتان مطعمتان بالصفائح الغليظة والمسامير المحدودبة . وأجمل ما في المقصورة شرفتها المميزة ذات الفتحة المستطيلة في الوسط إلى جانب هندسة المقصورة نفسها وأسلوب خراطة خشبها ونقشه، ومما نقرأ في نقش بأعلاه: «بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم وصلى الله على النبي محمد وآله وسلم تسليما، مما أمر بعمله أبو تميم المعز بن باديس بن منصور سلام الله عليه ...» ويشبه الإفريز المكتوب عليه ذلك النقش إفريزا مثله بضريح القائد الفاتح محمود الفزنوي في أفغانستان، بل أن إفريز مقصورة القيروان يكاد يكون هو الشبه الأمثل.

الصومعة
ومن أجمل ما يميز الصومعة القيروانية شرفات طابقيها الأول والثاني بما تمنحها وحداتها من تقويس بسيط في عقودها وتساو محكم في المجالات الفاصلة بينهما والفراغات المتوسطة بداخلها. ويجلل الطابق الأعلى على قبة مضلعة يظن أنها من إضافات العهد الحفصي. (آخر القرن التاسع هـ/ الثالث عشر م). وبأعلاها ثلاث كرات نحاسية متفاوتة الحجم وفوقها رسم للهلال من نحاس أيضا رمزا إلى مواقيت الإسلام في قوله تعالى «يسألونك عن الآهلة قل هي مواقيت للناس».
وتشير فتحته إلى اتجاه القبلة . ومن أعلى الصومعة ذات البناء الهرمي اللطيف يستطيع الزائر أو المشاهد الاستمتاع بمنظر المدينة الجميل ذات البياض المشرق وما يحيط بها من سهول وله كذلك أن يتأمل أبعاد الجامع من جميع جهاته ويشاهد بإعجاب قباب بيت الصلاة والأبواب الخارجية الفخمة والعضائد السميكة التي تدعم جداره الخارجي، وفي الوقت نفسه تكثر من حدة الشمس وتأثير الرياح عليه، فهي للعائذين به ظلا ودفئا دائمين. وتحيط بباب الصومعة رخامات ثلاث عظيمة الحجم، محفور عليها بأشكال نباتية بديعة. ومن نوادر المسجد أيضا«الزبيبتان» وهما في اصطلاح أهل القيروان الساريتان الكبيرتان الملونتان بلون العنب الجاف القائمتان من كل جانب بآخر الرواق الأوسط عند المحراب. ويقال في اعتقاد العامة أن من يجتاز بينهما ييسر الله دخول الجنة. ومهما يكن مصدر ذلك الاعتقاد إلا أنه غالبا ما يكون عند بسطاء الإيمان من أسباب الزيارة. وهما الساريتان اللتان قيل أن إمبراطور روما عندما علم بهما أعطى وزنهما ذهبا ! وهما من الرخام السماقي أو البرفيري.
يتواصل اليوم إشعاع الجامع المسجد ليبقى المنارة التي حملت وأشاعت حضارة الدين الإسلامي، وساهمت في تواصل هذه الحضارة.

أقدم من المدينة جامعها
ثمة قول يردده التونسيون يفيد بأن جامع القيروان أقدم من مدينها وهو كناية عن علاقة الجامع بالمدينة.
وجامع عقبة أو جامع القيروان هو أكبر مساجد الإسلام القديمة وأول بناء أقيم في إفريقيا المسلمة في أول عاصمة أسست لها، وما من أمير أو خليفة أو سلطان يبتغي جميل الذكر وحسن الخلود وخاصة الثواب عند الله إلا وقد التمس لوحا من ناحية من هذا المسجد يسجل فيه ترميما قام به أو تحسينا أذن به.
ويعد الجامع من أبرز ما جاءت به العمارة القيروانية، آبدة الحضارة الإسلامية بالمغرب فقد كان محل تعهد من طرف الولاة والأمراء الأفارقة.
ويعود الفضل لزيادة الله الأول في رسم ملامحه وتخطيطه النهائي (220-226 هـ) وهو يشتمل على 17 بلاطة وثمانية أساكيب ويستمد تخطيطه من الجوامع الأموية مع الاقتداء بجامع الرسول صلى الله وعليه وسلم.
ولمدينة القيروان مكانة خاصة في وجدان الرئيس زين العابدين بن علي الذي حباها وخصها باعتمادات مالية هامة في مخططات التنمية أعادت لها مجدها وظل اعلامها ورموزها.
ولقد كان من أبرز وأحدث مظاهر الاهتمام بجامع القيروان المشروع الرئاسي الكبير الذي شرع في إنجازه في شهر نوفمبر/تشرين الثاني 2000. والمتعلق بالإنارة الفنية للجامع بما زاده رونقا واجلالا وأظهرت روعة المعمار الذي يختصر به، سيما وأن هذه الإنارة يمكن أن تكون متحركة لأنها تعمل وفق منظومة إلكترونية وتتغير حسب توقيت زمني مبرمج مسبقا وقد أنجزت هذا المشروع التحديثي الذي يزيد الجامع بهاء وتألقا بخبرات تونسية.
وإذا كانت من عادة التونسيين سنويا إحياء ذكرى المولد النبوي الشريف في رحاب جامع عقبة فإنهم أيضا يفضلون مدينة القيروان في شهر رمضان المبارك للصلاة في جامعها الأعظم ولزيارة الأسواق المحيطة به للتعرف على ما تركه الأسلاف من إرث حضاري يحي سيرة القيروان مدينة الخشوع ، عاصمة المخزون التراثي الإسلامي لا في تونس فحسب وانما في المغرب العربي وشمال أفريقيا.
ويتميز جامع القيروان دون غيره من جوامع العالم الإسلامي التاريخية بما في ذلك جوامع عواصم الخلافة بالإضافة إلى معماره وتركيبته الهندسية بالمحافظة على أغلب أثاثه الأصلي الذي يرجع إلى فتراته الأولى وحسبنا للتدليل على ذلك أن نذكر المنبر الخشبي 298هـ وهو أقدم المنابر الإسلامية التي سلمت من تقلب الأزمان وهو مصنوع من خشب الساج. ويشتمل على ما يربو عن 106 لوحات تحمل زخارف نباتية وهندسية بديعة وتعبر عن تمازج التأثيرات البيزنطية والفارسية وتوحدها في روح إسلامية .

تزاوج بين الأمس واليوم
ويتألف المسجد من بناء مستطيل كبير، محوره الرئيسي يتجه تقريبا إلى الجنوب الشرقي ومظهر غاية في الانتظام والجمال. وترتكز الأبواب في الجانب الجنوبي الغربي بين دعامتين في معظم الحالات، وهناك رواق في الفراغ بينهما . والكل مغطى بآثار متعددة من الطلاء الكلسي ما عدا الدعائم في الجانب القبلي . وبما أن الأرض تنحدر من الشمال الغربي إلى الجنوب الشرقي فإن الجدران تختلف في الارتفاع من ثمانية أمتار إلى حوالي عشرة أمتار. والسمات الجيدة من الخارج هي القباب الخمسة والمئذنة الهائلة.

وتتقسم قاعدة الحرم إلى سبعة عشر جناحا بواسطة ستة عشر صفا من الأعمدة المتعامدة من الجدار الخلفي دون أن تصل إليه، لأن صفا عرضانيا يمتد على بعد ستة أمتار منه، وعلى هذا الأخير تستند الصفو ف الستة عشر. ويتألف كل من هذه الصفوف من سبعة أقواس مترابطة بواسطة صفين عرضانيين، يمتدان خلالهما بين القوسين الأول والثاني، والقوسين الرابع والخامس من الواجهة الأصلية على الصحن. ولا يخترق الصف الأخير الرواق المركزي.
ويبلغ متوسط ارتفاع الأعمـدة (3.55 مترا) ويترواح قطرها بين (34و44 سم). وتيجان هذه الأعمدة من أنواع مختلفة. بعض الأعمدة لها قواعد، أما أعمدة الصف الذي يبطن الجناح المركزي يبلغ متوسط ارتفاعها (4.23 مترا)، والأعمدة التي تحمل القبة أكثر ارتفاعا وهي أجمل ما في الحرم بعضها من الرخام الملون الجميل، وبعضها من الرخام الغرانيت، أو الرخام السماقي .
ويخيل لمن يطلع على المدينة من مكان مشرف أو من صومعة الجامع، وهي أعلى ما هناك أن قيروان الأغالبة والفاطميين وبني زيري هي قيروان اليوم... لو لا شيئا من التضييق في دائرة سورها الحسيني الحالي بالقياس إلى سورها الأموي القديم، بحيث لو أعيد عليها الآن لحّوط على جميع ما تخرم جوانبها حديثا من البناءات والمرافق والمنشآت، وربما تجاوزها إلى ما وراءها ببعيد... ومن النادر أن تجد أو تلمح روعة القدم على مدينة في العصر الحديث في عمر مدينة القيروان.

مشاريع إعمار وتوسعة
يؤكد الباحثون وعلماء الآثار أنه لم يبق من البناء الأول الذي بناه الفاتح عقبة بن نافع من الجامع سنة 50 للهجرة سوى المحراب. وهو مورى الآن خلف المحراب الأغلبي القائم. ولكن بالإمكان مشاهدته من خلال ثقوب زخرفية فيه مخصصة فيما يبدو لذلك الغرض في لوحات تزينه. أما بناء الجامع الماثل اليوم للعيان فيرجع إلى تجديدات عديدة وزيادات مختلفة يعود أهمها إلى آخر القرن الأول ثم القرنين الثاني والثالث. غير أن الفضل في بقاء محراب عقبة من الطوب إلى الأثر المشهور الوارد بحقه.
وذلك أن عقبة وجماعة الصحابة «اختلفوا عليه في القبلة، وقالوا إن جميع أهل المغرب يصنعون قبلتهم على قبلة هذا المسجد. فأجهد نفسه في تقويمها. فأقاموا أياما ينظرون إلى مطالع الشتاء والصيف من النجوم ومشارق الشمس فلما رأى أمرهم قد اختلف بات مغموما فدعا الله عز وجل أن يفرج عنه فأتاه آت في منامه فقال له: إذا أصبحت فخذ اللواء في يدك واجعله على عنقك. فإنك تسمع بين يديك تكبيرا لا يسمعه أحد من المسلمين غيرك فانظر الموضع الذي ينقطع عنك فيه التكبير، فهو قبلتك ومحرابك».
و تم له ما رأى في المنام «فركز لواءه وقال: هذا محرابك».
ويعود إلى الفاتح الصحابي حسان بن النعمان بناء الجامع على أثار عقبة بن نافع. فهو الذي أخذ فيه ووسعه أثناء ولايته (74 – 79هـ) بأمر من الخليفة الأموي في دمشق هشـام بن عبد الملك، ويقال أنه بأمر الخليفة هشام بنى بشير بن صفـوان خلال ولايتـه (103 – 109هـ) صومعة الجامع . وعنها يقول البكرى: «بنى الصومعة في بئر الجنان ونصب أساسها على الماء، واتفق أن وقعت في وسط الحائط». والجنان المقصود هو بستان لبني فهر. قوم عقبة.
والحائط هو الجدار الخارجي الذي قد يكون عقبة أو من بعده خطه للجامع. ويبدو أن اختيار البئر للنصب أساس الصومعة بها راجع إلى ما توفره البئر من عمق مناسب واتساع وحجارة صلدة في بناءها، خاصة إذا كانت من بناء الأول. أما توسطها للحائط القائمة فيه، وهو الحائط الشمالي، فلم يجعلها مقابلة تماما للمحراب المتوسط بطبيعة الحال في الجهة القبلية، بسبب الشكل المستطيل غير المتوازي الأضلاع الذي تهيأ للجامع.

صور
مقالات ذات صلة
قائمة مساجد تونس


== مراجع ==



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
DOUGGA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:54:23


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 10,061
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dougga
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dougga or Thugga or TBGG (Arabic: دقة, romanized: Duqqah; Tunisian Arabic: دڨة, romanized: ) was a Berber, Punic and Roman settlement near present-day Téboursouk in northern Tunisia. The current archaeological site covers 75 hectares (190 acres). UNESCO qualified Dougga as a World Heritage Site in 1997, believing that it represents "the best-preserved Roman small town in North Africa". The site, which lies in the middle of the countryside, has been protected from the encroachment of modern urbanization, in contrast, for example, to Carthage, which has been pillaged and rebuilt on numerous occasions. Dougga's size, its well-preserved monuments and its rich Numidian-Berber, Punic, ancient Roman, and Byzantine history make it exceptional. Amongst the most famous monuments at the site are a Libyco-Punic Mausoleum, the Capitol, the Roman theatre, and the temples of Saturn and of Juno Caelestis.

Names
The Numidian name of the settlement was recorded in the Libyco-Berber alphabet as TBGG. The Punic name of the settlement is recorded as tbgg (𐤕𐤁‬𐤂‬𐤂‬) and tbgʿg (𐤕𐤁‬𐤂𐤏‬𐤂). The Root B GG in Phoenician means ("in the roof terrace"). Camps states that this may represent a borrowing of a Berber word derived from the root tbg ("to protect"). This evidently derives from the site's position atop an easily defensible plateau. The name was borrowed into Latin as Thugga. Once it was granted "free status", it was formally refounded and known as Municipium Septimium Aurelium Liberum Thugga; "Septimium" and "Aurelium" are references to the "new" town's "founders" (conditores), Septimius Severus and M. Aurelius Antoninus (i.e., Caracalla). For treatment of liberum, see below. Once Dougga received the status of a Roman colony, it was formally known as Colonia Licinia Septimia Aurelia Alexandriana Thuggensis.
In present-day Berber, it is known as either Dugga or Tugga. That was borrowed into Arabic: دڨة or دقة and Dougga is a French transcription of this Arabic name.

Location
The archaeological site is located 4.6 km (2.9 mi) SSW of the modern town of Téboursouk on a plateau with an uninhibited view of the surrounding plains in the Oued Khalled. The site offers a high degree of natural protection, which helps to explain its early occupation. The slope on which Dougga is built rises to the north and is bordered in the east by the cliff known as Kef Dougga. Further to the east, the ridge of the Fossa Regia, a ditch and boundary made by the Romans after the destruction of Carthage, indicates Dougga's position as a point of contact between the Punic and Berber worlds.

History
Dougga's history is best known from the time of the Roman conquest, even though numerous pre-Roman monuments, including a necropolis, a mausoleum, and several temples have been discovered during archaeological digs. These monuments are an indication of the site's importance before the arrival of the Romans.

Berber Kingdom
The city appears to have been founded in the 6th century BC. Some historians believe that Dougga is the city of Tocae (Ancient Greek: Τοκαί, Tokaí), which was captured by a lieutenant of Agathocles of Syracuse at the end of the 4th century BC; Diodorus of Sicily described Tocae as "a city of beautiful grandeur".
Dougga was in any case an early and important human settlement. Its urban character is evidenced by the presence of a necropolis with dolmens, the most ancient archaeological find at Dougga, a sanctuary dedicated to Ba'al Hammon, neo-Punic steles, a mausoleum, architectural fragments, and a temple dedicated to Masinissa, the remains of which were found during archaeological excavations. Even though our knowledge of the city before the Roman conquest remains very limited, recent archaeological finds have revolutionized the image that we had of this period.
The identification of the temple dedicated to Masinissa beneath the forum disproved Louis Poinssot's theory that the Numidian city stood on the plateau but that it was separate from the newer Roman settlement. The temple, which was erected in the tenth year of Micipsa's reign (139 BC), is 14 m × 6.3 m (46 ft × 21 ft) wide. It proves that the area around the forum was already built upon before the arrival of the Roman colonists. A building dating to the 2nd century BC has also been discovered nearby. Similarly, Dougga's mausoleum is not isolated but stands within an urban necropolis.
Recent finds have disproved earlier theories about the so-called "Numidian walls". The walls around Dougga are in fact not Numidian; they are part of the city's fortifications erected in late antiquity. Targeted digs have also proven that what had been interpreted as two Numidian towers in the walls are in fact two funeral monuments from the Numidian era reused much later as foundations and a section of defences.
The discovery of Libyan and Punic inscriptions at the site provoked a debate on the administration of the city at the time of the Kingdom of Numidia. The debate—about the interpretation of epigraphic sources—focussed on the question of whether the city was still under Punic influence or whether it was increasingly Berber. Local Berber institutions distinct from any form of Punic authority arose from the Numidian period onwards, but Camps notes that Punic shofets were still in place in several cities, including Dougga, during the Roman era, which is a sign of continuing Punic influence and the preservation of certain elements of Punic civilization well after the fall of Carthage.

Roman Empire
The Romans granted Dougga the status of an indigenous city (Latin: civitas) following their conquest of the region.
The creation of the colony of Carthage during the reign of Augustus complicated Dougga's institutional status. The city was included in the territory (pertica) of the Roman colony, but around this time, a community (pagus) of Roman colonists also arose alongside the existing settlement. For two centuries, the site was thus governed by two civic and institutional bodies: the city with its peregrini and the pagus with its Roman citizens. Both had Roman civic institutions: magistrates and a council (ordo) of decurions for the city, a local council from the end of the 1st century AD, and local administrators for the pagus, who were legally subordinated to the distant but powerful colony of Carthage. In addition, epigraphic evidence indicates that a Punic-style dual magistracy, the sufetes, achieved some civic stature here well into the imperial period. In fact, the city once had three magistrates serve at once, a relative rarity in the Mediterranean.
Over time, the romanization of the city brought the two communities closer together. Notable members of the peregrini increasingly adopted Roman culture and behavior, became Roman citizens, and the councils of the two communities began to take decisions in unison. The increasing closeness of the communities was facilitated at first by their geographic proximity—there was no physical distinction between their two settlements—and then later by institutional arrangements. During the reign of Marcus Aurelius, the city was granted Roman law; from this moment onward, the magistrates automatically received Roman citizenship and the rights of the city's inhabitants became similar to those of the Roman citizens. During the same era, the pagus won a certain degree of autonomy from Carthage; it was able to receive bequests and administer public funds.
Nonetheless, it was not until AD 205, during the reign of Septimius Severus, that the two communities came together as one municipality (municipium), made "free" (see below) while Carthage's pertica was reduced. The city was supported by the euergetism of its great families of wealthy individuals, which sometimes reached exorbitant levels, while its interests were successfully represented by appeals to the emperors. Dougga's development culminated during the reign of Gallienus, when it obtained the status of a separate Roman colony.
Dougga's monuments attest to its prosperity in the period from the reign of Diocletian to that of Theodosius I, but it fell into a sort of stupor from the 4th century. The city appears to have experienced an early decline, as evidenced by the relatively poor remains of Christianity. The period of Byzantine rule saw the area around the forum transformed into a fort; several important buildings were destroyed in order to provide the necessary materials for its construction.

Caliphate
Dougga was never completely abandoned following the Muslim invasions of the area. For a long time, Dougga remained the site of a small village populated by the descendants of the city's former inhabitants, as evidenced by the small mosque situated in the Temple of August Piety and the small bath dating to the Aghlabid period on the southern flank of the forum.

Archaeological work
The first Western visitors to have left eyewitness accounts of the ruins reached the site in the 17th century. This trend continued in the 18th century and at the start of the 19th century. The best-preserved monuments, including the mausoleum, were described and, at the end of this period, were the object of architectural studies.
The establishment of France's Tunisian protectorate in 1881 led to the creation of a national antiquities institute (French: Institut national du patrimoine), for which the excavation of the site at Dougga was a priority from 1901, parallel to the works carried out at Carthage. The works at Dougga concentrated at first on the area around the forum; other discoveries ensured that there was an almost constant series of digs at the site until 1939. Alongside these excavations, work was conducted to restore the capitol, of which only the front and the base of the wall of the cella were still standing, and to restore the mausoleum, particularly between 1908 and 1910 .
After Tunisia's independence, other buildings were excavated, including the Temple of Caracalla's Victory in Germany. During the same period, the last inhabitants of the site were evicted and relocated to a village located on the plain several kilometers from the antique site, which is named New Dougga. In 1991, the decision was taken to make the site into a national archaeological park. A cooperative scientific programme aims in particular to promote the study of the inscriptions at the site and the pagan temples. In 1997, Dougga was added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites.
Despite its importance and its exceptional state, Dougga remains off the beaten track for many tourists and receives only about 50,000 visitors per year. In order to make it more attractive, the construction of an on-site museum is being considered, while the national antiquities institute has established a website presenting the site and the surrounding region. For the time being, visitors with sufficient time can appreciate Dougga, not only because of its many ruins but also for its olive groves, which give the site a unique ambiance.

Dougga's "Liberty"
From AD 205, when the city (civitas) and community (pagus) fused into one municipality (municipium), Dougga bore the title liberum, whose significance is not immediately clear. The term appears in the titles of a certain number of other municipia also founded at the same time: Thibursicum Bure, Aulodes, and Thysdrus. Several interpretations of its meaning have been suggested. According to Merlin and Poinssot, the term derives from the name of the god Liber, in whose honor a temple was erected at Dougga. The epithet Liberum would thus follow the same pattern as Frugifer and Concordia, which appear in the title of Thibursicum Bure. Thibursicum Bure is however an exception to the rule; the titles of the other municipia including the term liberum do not include the names of any divinities, and this hypothesis has therefore been abandoned. Alternatively, liberum is taken as a reference to free status (libertas, "liberty"). This interpretation is confirmed by an inscription found at Dougga that honors Alexander Severus as the "preserver of liberty" (conservator libertatis).
It is, however, unclear exactly what form this liberty took. Toutain is of the opinion that this is a designation for a particular type of municipium—free cities where the Roman governor did not have the right to control the municipal magistrates. There is however no evidence that Dougga enjoyed exceptional legal privileges of the type associated with certain free cities such as Aphrodisias in Asia Minor. Veyne has thus suggested that Dougga's "freedom" is nothing but an expression of the concept of liberty without any legal meaning; obtaining the status of a municipium had freed the city of its subjugation and enabled it to adorn itself with the "ornaments of liberty" (ornamenta libertatis). The city's liberty was celebrated just as its dignity was extolled; the emperor Probus is a "preserver of liberty and dignity" (conservator libertatis et dignitatis). Gascou, in line with Veyne's interpretation, describes the situation thus: "Liberum, in Thugga's title, is a term [...] with which the city, which had waited a long time for the status of a municipium, is happy to flatter itself".

Despite Gascou's conclusion, efforts have been made more recently to identify concrete aspects of Dougga's liberty. Lepelley believes on the one hand that this must be a reference to the relations between the city and Rome and on the other hand that the term can cover a range of diverse privileges of differing degrees. It is known that the territory of Carthage, to which the Dougga pagus belonged until AD 205, enjoyed such privileges: the inhabitants of the pagus even sent an appeal during Trajan's reign to defend the fiscal immunity of the territory of Carthage (immunitas perticae Carthaginiensium). The Dougga civitas had not been granted this concession, so the fusion of pagus with the civitas meant that the citizens of the pagus risked losing their enviable privilege. The liberty of the municipia founded during the reign of Septimius Severus could thus be a reference to the fiscal immunity made possible by the region's great wealth and by the emperor's generosity to each municipium at the time of its fusion. During the reign of Gallienus, a certain Aulus Vitellius Felix Honoratus, a well-known individual in Dougga, made an appeal to the emperor "in order to assure the public liberty". Lepelley believes that this is an indication that the city's privilege had been called into question, although Dougga appears to have been at least partially able to preserve its concessions, as evidenced by an inscription to the honor of "Probus, defender of its liberty".
According to Christol though, this interpretation overly restricts the meaning of the word libertas. In Christol's view, it is important not to forget that the emperor's decision in 205 must have been taken in response to a request made by the civitas and must have taken account of the relations that already existed between it and the pagus. It was the autonomy that the civitas had achieved during the reign of Marcus Aurelius and the granting of Roman law that raised the specter of a fusion of the two communities, which would without a doubt have provoked a certain unease in the pagus. The inhabitants of the pagus would have expressed "concern or even refusal when faced with the pretensions of their closest neighbors". This would explain the honor that the pagus attributed to Commodus (conservator pagi, "protector of the community").
For Christol, the term liberum must be understood in this context and in an abstract sense. This liberty derives from belonging to a city and expresses the end of the civitas's dependence, "the elevation of a community of peregrini to the liberty of Roman citizenship", which also served to placate the fears of the inhabitants of the pagus and to open the door to a later promotion, to the status of a colony. This promotion took place in AD 261, during the reign of Gallienus, following an appeal from Aulus Vitellius Felix Honoratus in Christol's version of events. Thereafter, the defence of the libertas publica was not a question of defending a privilege at risk, but of requesting the "ultimate liberty" (summa libertas)—the promotion to the status of a colony. Christol also points out that, despite the abstract character of terms such as libertas or dignitas, their formal appearance should be references to concrete and unique events.

General layout
The city as it exists today consists essentially of remains from the Roman era dating for the most part to the 2nd and 3rd century. The Roman builders had to take account both of the site's particularly craggy terrain and of earlier constructions, which led them to abandon the normal layout of Roman settlements, as is also particularly evident in places such as Timgad.
Recent archaeological digs have confirmed the continuity in the city's urban development. The heart of the city has always been at the top of the hill, where the forum replaced the Numidian agora. As Dougga developed, urban construction occupied the side of the hill, so that the city must have resembled "a compact mass", according to Hédi Slim
Early archaeological digs concentrated on public buildings, which meant that private buildings tended at first to be uncovered at the ends of the trenches dug for this purpose. Later, trenches were cut with the purpose of exposing particularly characteristic private buildings.

Numidian residence
Traces of a residence dating to the Numidian era have been identified in the foundations of the temple dedicated to Liber. Although these traces are very faint, they served to disprove the theories of the first archaeologists, including Louis Poinssot, that the Roman and pre-Roman settlements were located on separate sites. The two settlements evidently overlapped.

The trifolium villa
This residence, which dates to the 2nd or 3rd century, stands downhill from the quarters that surround the forum and the principal public monuments in the city, in an area where the streets are winding.
The trifolium villa, named after a clover-shaped room that was without a doubt used as a triclinium, is the largest private house excavated so far at Dougga. The house had two storeys, but there is almost nothing left of the upper storey. It stands in the south of the city, halfway up the hill. The house is particularly interesting because of the way in which it is built to align with the lay of the land; the entrance hall slopes down to a courtyard around which the various rooms were arranged.

The market
The market dates from the middle of the 1st century. It took the form of a square 35.5 m × 28 m (116 ft × 92 ft) in size, surrounded by a portico and shops on two sides. The northern side had a portico, while an exedra occupied the southern side. The exedra probably housed a statue of Mercury.
In order to compensate for the natural incline of the ground on which the market stands, its builders undertook significant earthworks. These earthworks have been dated as being amongst the oldest Roman constructions, and their orientation vis-à-vis the forum seems to suggest that they were not built on any earlier foundations. The modern-day location of the remains from the market near the forum should however not be misunderstood as indicating a link between the two. The market was almost completely destroyed during the construction of the Byzantine fort. It was excavated in 1918–1919.

Licinian Baths
The Licinian Baths are interesting for having much of its original walls intact, as well as a long tunnel used by the slaves working at the baths. The baths were donated to the city by the Licinii family in the 3rd century. They were primarily used as winter baths. The frigidarium  has triple arcades at both ends and large windows with views over the valley beyond.

Funerary structures
Dolmens
The presence of dolmens in North Africa has served to stoke historiographic debates that have been said to have ideological agendas. The dolmens at Dougga have been the subject of archaeological digs, which have also uncovered skeletons and ceramic models.
Although it is difficult to put a date on the erection of the dolmens, as they were in use until the dawn of the Christian era, it seems likely that they date from at least 2000 years BC. Gabriel Camps has suggested that a link to Sicily. He has made the same suggestion for the "haouanet" tombs found in Algeria and Tunisia.

Numidian bazina tombs
A type of tomb unique to the Numidian world has been discovered at Dougga. They are referred to as bazina tombs or circular monument tombs.

Punic-Libyan Mausoleum
The Mausoleum of Ateban is one of the very rare examples of royal Numidian architecture. There is another in Sabratha in Libya. Some authors believe that there is a link with the funeral architecture in Anatolia and the necropoleis in Alexandria from the 3rd and 2nd century BC.
This tomb is 21 m (69 ft) tall and was built in the 2nd century BC. A bilingual inscription installed in the mausoleum mentioned that the tomb was dedicated to Ateban, the son of Iepmatath and Palu. In 1842, Sir Thomas Reade, the British consul in Tunis seriously damaged the monument while removing this inscription. This bilingual Punic-Libyan Inscription, now held at the British Museum, made it possible to decode the Libyan characters. It has only recently been established that the inscription was originally located on one side of a fake window on the podium. According to the most recent research, the names cited in the inscription are only those of its architect and of representatives of the different professions involved in its construction. The monument was built by the inhabitants of the city for a Numidian prince; some authors believe that it was intended for Massinissa
The monument owes its current appearance to the work of French archaeologist Louis Poinssot, who essentially reconstructed it from pieces that were left lying on the ground. The tomb is accessed via a pedestal with five steps. On the northern side of the podium (the lowest of three levels in the monument), there is an opening to the funeral chamber that is closed with a stone slab. The other sides are decorated with fake windows and four Aeolic pilasters. The second level is made up of a temple-like colonnade (naiskos); the columns on each side are Ionic. The third level is the most richly decorated of all: in addition to pilasters similar to those on the lowest level, it is capped with a pyramid. Some elements of carved stone have also survived.

Roman sepulchres
Although work has in the past been undertaken to uncover the Roman sepulchres, today they have been reclaimed in part by olive trees.

The different necropoleis mark the zones of settlement at Dougga. There are five areas that have been identified as necropoleis: the first in the northeast, around the Temple of Saturn and the Victoria Church, the second in the northwest, a zone which also encompasses the dolmens on the site, the third in the west, between the Aïn Mizeb and Aïn El Hammam cisterns and to the north of the Temple of Juno Caelestis, the fourth and the fifth in the south and the south-east, one around the mausoleum and the other around Septimius Severus' triumphal arch.

Hypogeum
The hypogeum is a half-buried edifice from the 3rd century. It was erected in the middle of the oldest necropolis, which was excavated in 1913. The hypogeum was designed to house funeral urns in small niches in the walls; at the time of its discovery, it contained sarcophagi, which suggests that it was in use for a long time.

Political monuments
Triumphal arches
Dougga still contains two triumphal arches, which are in different states of disrepair.

Septimius Severus's arch, which is heavily damaged, stands close to the mausoleum and on the route leading from Carthage to Théveste. It was erected in AD 205.
Alexander Severus' arch, which dates from 222 to 235, is relatively well preserved, despite the loss of its upper elements. It is equidistant from the capitol and the Temple of Juno Caelestis. Its arcade is 4 m (13 ft) tall.
A third triumphal arch, dating from the Tetrarchy, has been completely lost.

Forum
The city forum, which is 924 m2 (9,950 sq ft) in size is small. It is better preserved in some places than others, because the construction of the Byzantine fort damaged a large section of it. The capitol, which stands on an area surrounded by porticos, dominates its surroundings by virtue of its imposing appearance. The "square of the Rose of the Winds" (which is named after a decorative element) seems more like an esplanade leading to the Temple of Mercury, which stands on its northern side, than an open public space. The city's curia and a tribune for speeches probably also stood here.
Long ago, archaeologists believed that Roman settlement at Dougga occurred ex nihilo. This suggestion has been contradicted by the discovery of a sanctuary dedicated to Massinissa amongst the substructures to the rear of the capitol.

Recreational facilities
Theatre
Roman theatres were a fundamental element of the monumental make-up of a city from the reign of Augustus.
The theatre, which was built in AD 168 or 169, is one of the best preserved examples in Roman Africa. It could seat 3500 spectators, even though Dougga only had 5000 inhabitants. It was one of a series of imperial buildings constructed over the course of two centuries at Dougga which deviate from the classic "blueprints" only inasmuch as they have been adapted to take account of the local terrain. Some minor adjustments have been made and the local architects had a certain freedom with regard to the ornamentation of the buildings.

A dedication engraved into the pediment of the stage and on the portico the dominates the city, recalls the building's commissioner, P. Marcius Quadratus, who "built [it] for his homeland with his own denarii"; the dedication was celebrated with "scenic representations, distributions of life, a festival and athletic games".
The theater is still used for performances of classic theater, particularly during the festival of Dougga, and conservation work has been carried out on it.

Auditorium
The site known as the auditorium is an annex of the Temple of Liber, which probably served for the initiation of novices. Despite its modern appellation, the auditorium was not a site for spectacles; only its form suggests otherwise. It measures 20 m × 20 m (66 ft × 66 ft).

Circus
The city has a circus designed for chariot racing, but it is barely visible nowadays. Originally, the circus consisted of nothing more than a field; an inscription in the temple in honor of Caracalla's victory in Germany notes that the land was donated by the Gabinii in 214 and describes it as an ager qui appellatur circus (field that serves as a circus) ). In 225 though, the site was prepared and the circus was constructed. It was financed by the magistrates (duumviri and aedile) after they had promised to do so following in response to a request from the entire population of the city. The circus was built to take the maximum possible advantage of the surrounding landscape, in reflection of an understandable need to limit costs in a medium-sized city with limited resources, but certainly also out of desire to finish the construction works as quickly as possible, given that magistrates' mandates were limited to one year. The construction was nonetheless expected to have "a certain magnitude"; at 393 m (1,289 ft) long with a spina 190 m × 6 m (623 ft × 20 ft), the circus is quite extraordinary in Roman Africa. The circus marks Dougga out as one of the most important cities in the province, alongside Carthage, Thysdrus, Leptis Magna, Hadrumet et Utica. The donation of the land for the pleasure of the general populace (ad voluptatem populi) and its development following a request from the entire population (postulante universo populo) are a reminder of the importance of spectacles in the social life of Roman cities and the demand for popular entertainment.

Amphitheater
The question of whether there was an amphitheater at Dougga has not been conclusively answered. Traditionally, a large elliptic depression to the northwest of the site has been interpreted as the site of an amphitheater. Archeologists have however become much more cautious on this subject.

Baths
Three Roman baths have been completely excavated at Dougga; a fourth has so far only been partially uncovered. Of these four baths, one ("the bath of the house to the west of the Temple of Tellus") belongs to a private residence, two, the Aïn Doura bath and the bath known for a long time as the "Licinian bath", were, judging by their size, open to the public, while the nature of the last bath, the bath of the Cyclopses, is more difficult to interpret.

Bath of the Cyclopses
During the excavation of the Bath of the Cyclopses, a mosaic of cyclopses forging Jupiter's thunderbolts was uncovered. It is now on display at the Bardo National Museum, where several very well preserved latrines are also on display. The building has been dated to the 3rd century CE on the basis of a study of the mosaic.
The size of the building (its frigidarium is less than 30 m2 (320 sq ft)) has led some experts to believe that it was a private bath, but the identification of a domus in the immediate vicinity has proven difficult. The "trifolium villa" is quite distant, and the closest ruins are hard to identify as they have not been well preserved. Yvon Thébert therefore suggests that the bath served the local quarter.

Antonian or Licinian Bath
The Antonian Bath, which dates from the 3rd century, was known as the Licinian Baths (after emperor Publius Licinius Egnatius Gallienus) and has several storeys. Louis Poinssot's identification of the bath as dating to Gallienus' reign on the basis of incomplete inscriptions and Dougga's prosperity at this time has been called into question by recent research, conducted in particular by Michel Christol. Christol has suggested that the bath dates from the reign of Caracalla; this thesis has since been confirmed by an analysis of inscriptions. Others have even suggested that the bath dates from the reign of the Severan dynasty, because of a particularity which became common a century later in the west: the columns in the northwest peristyle feature daises bearing arches.
The bath was later used for the production of olive oil at an unknown date.
The symmetrical building is medium-sized, with an area of 1,700 m2 (18,000 sq ft) excluding the palaestra, of which 175 m2 (1,880 sq ft) are taken up by the frigidarium. The construction of the bath required work both to lower and to raise sections of the slope on which it stood, which may explain why parts of the building have been better preserved than others; the section built on raised ground has for the most part been lost.

Aïn Doura Baths
In the immediate vicinity of Aïn Doura is a partially excavated complex that could turn out to be the largest bath in the city, the Aïn Doura Baths. On the basis of the mosaics that have been found here, it has been suggested that the bath dates from the end of the 2nd century or the start of the 3rd century, and that the mosaic décor was renewed in the 4th century CE.
The complex remains largely unexposed, but it seems, according to Yvon Thébert, that it has a symmetrical design, of which only a section of the cold rooms has been excavated.

The bath of the house to the west of the Temple of Tellus
This bath, measuring 75 m2 (810 sq ft), which can be accessed from the house and from the street, was uncovered at the start of the 20th century. The archaeological analysis of the bath's relationship with the house in which it is located has led Thébert to suggest that it was a later addition to the original construction but he does not propose a date for this event.

Religious edifices
There is archaeological or epigraphic evidence for more than twenty temples at Dougga; a significant number for a small city. There are archaeological remains and inscriptions proving the existence of eleven temples, archaeological remains of a further eight, and inscriptions referring to another fourteen. This abundance of religious sites is the result in particular of the philanthropy of wealthy families.

Temple of Massinissa
The Temple of Massinissa is located on the western flank of the capital. The first archaeologists believed that the remains of the temple were a monumental fountain, even though an inscription proving the existence of a sanctuary to the deceased Numidian king was discovered in 1904. This inscription has been dated to 139 BC, during the reign of Micipsa.
The remains are similar to those of the temple in Chemtou and are evidence of the fact that the political center of the Roman city was in the same place as the Hellenic agora. The stone remains found in this area seem to belong to several different structures; the exact location of the sanctuary is still open to debate.
Although it is believed that the sanctuary set Massinissa on par with a god, this is debated by some experts. Gsell believes that a temple to the king would reflect a continuation of eastern and Hellenic practices; Camps builds on this hypothesis, pointing out the lack of any antique sources testifying to anything more than simple expressions of respect by a people vis-à-vis its king. According to Camps, the temple is only a memorial, a site belonging to a funeral cult. Its construction ten years into Micipsa's reign can be explained by its political symbolism: Micipsa, sole ruler after the death of his brothers Gulussa and Mastanabal, was affirming the unity of his kingdom around the person of the king.

The Capitol
The Capitol is a Roman temple from the 2nd century, principally dedicated to Rome's protective triad: Jupiter Best and Greatest (Jupiter Optimus Maximus), Juno the Queen (Juno Regina), and Minerva the August (Minerva Augusta). It has a secondary dedication to the wellbeing of the emperors Lucius Verus and Marcus Aurelius; judging by this reference, the Capitol must have been completed in AD 166-167.
Thomas d'Arcos identified the Capitol as a temple of Jupiter in the 17th century. It was the object of further research at the end of the 19th century, led in particular by the doctor Louis Carton in 1893. The walls, executed in opus africanum style, and the entablature of the portico were restored between 1903 and 1910. Claude Poinssot discovered a crypt beneath the cella in 1955. The most recent works were carried out by the Tunisian Institut national du patrimoine between 1994 and 1996.
The Capitol is exceptionally well preserved, which is a consequence of its inclusion in the Byzantine fortification. A series of eleven stairs lead up to the front portico. The temple front's Corinthian columns are 8 m (26 ft) tall, on top of which is the perfectly preserved pediment. The pediment bears a depiction of emperor Antoninus Pius's elevation to godhood. The emperor is being carried by an eagle.
The base of the cella still features alcoves for three statues. The middle alcove houses a colossal statue of Jupiter.
The discovery of the head of a statue of Jupiter has led Poinssot to suggest that the crypt dates from the period of Christianity's triumph over the old religions. St-Amans does not exclude the possibility that the crypt was built at the same time as the Byzantine citadel, of which the forum and capitol formed the nerve center.
The construction of the Capitol at Dougga occurred at the same time as the construction of other monuments of the same type elsewhere in North Africa, which Gros explains as a consequence of the greater proximity of the imperial cult and the cult of Jupiter.
Near the Capitol are the "square of the Rose of the Winds"—which is named after a compass rose that is engraved on the floor—and the remains of the Byzantine citadel, which reused a section of the ruins after the city's decline.

Temple of Mercury
The Temple of Mercury is also dedicated to Tellus. It faces towards the market; between the two lies the "square of the Rose of the Winds". The temple is largely in ruins. It has three cellae but no courtyard. The sanctuary, which can be accessed via a series of four stairs, stands on a faded podium. It was excavated and shored up between 1904 and 1908.

Temple of August Piety
The small Temple of August Piety was built during the reign of Hadrian. It was financed through the philanthropy of a certain Caius Pompeius Nahanius. The temple faces the "square of the Rose of the Winds". Part of the vestibule survives. Behind the temple, on the foundations of the Temple of Fortuna, Venus Concordia and Mercury, stands a mosque. The mosque is the last remnant of the little village that existed on the site until the creation of New Dougga.
D'Arcos identified the temple in 1631 thanks to an inscription that was still in place at the time. The podium is relatively low (1–1.5 m or 3 ft 3 in – 4 ft 11 in); it can be ascended by a series of seven stairs on the southern side.

Temple of Minerva
The first Temple of Minerva at Dougga was a gift of the patron of the civitas at the end of the 1st century, but the more important site dedicated to this divinity is a building which features a temple and an area surrounded by a portico dating from the reign of Antoninus Pius. It was financed through the philanthropy of a priestess of the imperial cult, Julia Paula Laenatiana. The building was designed to take advantage of the slope on which it stands; the podium is at the level of the roof of the portico and the temple in the strict sense of the word is located outside the surrounding building. The stairs providing access to the temple accentuates the inaccessible nature of the divinity.

Temple of Caracalla's Victory in Germany
The Temple of Caracalla's Victory in Germany is the only edifice dedicated to the imperial cult to have been located precisely at Dougga. Fragments of an inscription on the temple's lintel were discovered in 1835, but the temple was not identified until 1966. It features a nymphaeum that dates to the reign of Commodus.
The temple, which is relatively narrow, has an unusual design. It is 41.5 m × 14.2 m (136 ft × 47 ft), and is situated beside the road that descends from the forum to the Aïn Doura Bath. The temple is associated with a triumphal arch over the road. The temple can be accessed via a semi-circular staircase; in each corner of the courtyard in front of the staircase is a reservoir for rain water. The cella inside the sanctuary features six lateral niches which are designed to hold the bases of statues of Apollo, Liber, Neptune, Mercury and of two other gods that can no longer be identified.
The temple can be seen from afar, but passers-by can only see the cella, the foundations of which are decoratively rusticated. Seven columns are spaced along the cella, linking to the lateral door, which opens onto the staircase. The tetrastyle temple is built in Tuscan order in antis. The temple's design is unusual inasmuch as temples of the imperial cult are generally Corinthian and located in the middle of a vast courtyard with a portico; the Tuscan order was thus quite rare in the provinces.
The temple therefore bears witness to a desire to construct something that was different from other such buildings, doubtless in response to the constraints created by the terrain. The dedication in the temple sheds light on its construction: the inscription, which has been very precisely dated to AD 214, consecrates the temple to the personification of victory, Victoria, here specifically in connection with the emperor's campaigns in Germany, for the welfare of Caracalla and of his mother Iulia Domna.
The text recalls the military projects of the son of Septimius Severus and their celebration within the context of the imperial cult. This inscription also explains that the temple was constructed at a cost of 100,000 sestertii on the wishes of a great lady of Dougga named Gabinia Hermiona after her death. Besides the generosity of this act of philanthropy, her will foresaw the holding of an annual banquet for the ordo decurionum to be financed by her inheritors on the anniversary of the dedication of the temple. At the same time, Gabinia Hermiona bequeathed the land for the circus "for the pleasure of the people".
The temple occupied what was doubtlessly one of the last free spaces in the vicinity of the forum. The temple's benefactor preferred this site in the city center to those that she owned in the outskirts: the site of the circus or the site where the Temple of Celeste was later built. Gabinia's family, one of the richest in Dougga, was well placed within Carthage's notables and maintained its power at Dougga, even during the reduction of the local aristocracy in the 3rd century. The terms of Gabinia's will provide evidence of her concern that the family should endure - the annual banquet would keep alive the memory of the family's generosity and emphasize its sociability, while the circus would provide for the pleasure of the most humble of the city's inhabitants.

At the end of the 4th century, the Temple of Caracalla's Victory in Germany was transformed into a church. The reservoirs in the courtyard were filled in order to provide space for the faithful, while pulpits were added to the cella. The decoration of the cella was also modified.

Temple of Pluto
Pluto receives particular honor at Dougga as the city's patron divinity, as demonstrated by the Genius Thuggae.
It is possible that the Temple of Pluto is located near Septimius Severus's triumphal arch in an area of the city that has only been partially excavated as yet, but this hypothesis is not very firm and is based on the discovery of a bust in a courtyard, which has been dated by Poinssot to the 2nd or 3rd century. The associated building was excavated in the 1960s but little is known about the manner in which the excavation was conducted and the stabilization work carried out at the site. A cella with just one niche has been discovered on a podium in the middle of a courtyard and the altar has also been preserved.
An architectural study was carried out between 2000 and 2002, but it did not lead to any excavation work.

Temple of Saturn
Saturn was the successor of the Punic Ba'al Hammon and was the attendant (paredros) of Tanit or Heavenly Juno (Juno Caelestis). During the Roman era, the city of Dougga had at least two sanctuaries dedicated to Saturn. The evidence for the existence of one of the two derives mostly from inscriptions found in the city. The second temple, which is the one commonly known as the Temple of Saturn at Dougga, has been excavated. The remains of this temple, which are less significant than those of the capitol or the Temple of Juno Caelestis, are of particular interest because of their location. The ruins lie atop a promontory that overlooks the rich cereal valley of the Oued Khalled, 160 m (520 ft) from the theater and outside the bounds of the city. During the excavation works, remains of a temple of Ba'al Hammon, particularly ritual ditches (favissae) containing ex-votos, were discovered. The Roman temple thus replaced an indigenous sanctuary that dated back at least to the 2nd century BC. This sanctuary consisted essentially of a wide open space designed to receive ex-votos and sacrifices. It was covered over to facilitate the construction of the Temple of Saturn, the ruins of which can still be seen today.
The Roman temple was built during the reign of Septimius Severus. It consists of three cellae, a courtyard with a portico, and a vestibule. Water from the temple roof was collected in cisterns. An inscription provides details about the temple's construction: it was erected using funds bequeathed in the testament of a notable local resident named Lucius Octavius Victor Roscianus at a cost of at least 150,000 sestertii, which seems expensive but may be explained by the extent of the earthworks required to give the temple a solid foundation; these works nonetheless seem to have proven insufficient as work to restore and shore up the edifice appear to have been carried out before it finally fell into ruin.

Temple of Juno Caelestis
The Temple of Juno Caelestis, which was built on the outskirts of the city, was described in the 17th century and excavated in the 1890s. Significant restoration work was undertaken between 1904 and 1914, and new studies were carried out between 1999 and 2002.

The temple is dedicated to Heavenly Juno (Juno Caelestis), the successor of the Punic god Tanit. Its well-preserved temenos is demarcated by a wall, a large section of which has been very well preserved. The court is only partially tiled and has two symmetrical doors. A portico with 25 bays runs along the circular section of the temenos. The portico is topped with a frieze depicting the construction of the temple.
The temple in the strict sense of the word stands on a high podium that can be accessed via a series of eleven steps. It is a Corinthian hexastyle peripteros. The pediment features a dedication to Alexander Severus. The cella has been completely lost.
The temple, which was erected between AD 222 and 235, was paid for by a certain Q. Gabinius Rufus Felix, who donated inter alia two silver statues of Juno Caelestis that cost 35,000 sestertii.
The temenos, which is 52 m (171 ft) in diameter, is reminiscent of a crescent moon, the symbol of Juno Caelestis.

Dar Lacheb
The purpose of the edifice known as Dar Lacheb (Latin: Domus Lachebia, "House of Lacheb") has not been clearly identified. St-Amans believes that it is a sanctuary dedicated to Aesculapius, which accords with Poinssot's hypothesis that it is a temple.
Dar Lacheb was excavated at the end of the 19th century by Carton and has not been the subject of further works since 1912. A house that was built nearby re-using antique remains was destroyed at the start of the 20th century.
Dar Lacheb was built between AD 164 and 166, at the same era as the capitol, which is 50 m (160 ft) away. The entrance to the building has been perfectly preserved, as has one of the columns of the entrance porch. The interior consists of a courtyard that was once surrounded with a portico. To the south is the cella of a temple that has been entirely destroyed.

Victoria Church
The Victoria Church, which stands in the northeast of the site, below the Temple of Saturn, is the only Christian building that has been so far excavated at Dougga. At the end of the 4th century or at the start of the 5th century, the Christian community erected the unusually designed little church over a pagan cemetery. The small hypogeum is located nearby.

Bishopric
During antiquity, Thugga was also the seat of the bishop of Thucca Terenbenthina. The bishopric was founded during the Roman Empire and survived through the Arian Vandal Kingdom and Orthodox Byzantine Empire, only ceasing to function with the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb. The diocese was re-founded by the Roman Catholic Church as a titular see in the 20th century.

Infrastructure
Cisterns and aqueducts
Dougga has two networks of cisterns, in the north and in the west, one of which is particularly well preserved. An aqueduct leading to the city, located a short distance from the well-preserved cisterns, is amongst the best preserved examples of this type of structure on the territory of modern-day Tunisia.
The six cisterns of Aïn El Hammam, situated close to the Temple of Juno Caelestis, have a total capacity of 6000 m3 but are in ruins. They were fed by a spring 12 km (7.5 mi) away and an aqueduct constructed during the reign of Commodus and restored in the last quarter of the 4th century CE.
This site is still used once annually for a festival celebrating Mokhola, who was a female saint and benefactor of Moroccan origin according to local oral tradition The veneration of Mokhola is accompanied with animal sacrifices. It has been shown that this tradition has pagan origins; the object of veneration was originally the spring, known as fons moccolitanus
The second network of cisterns, the cisterns of Aïn Mizeb, is very well preserved. Located close to the Temple of Minerva, these eight domed reservoirs can hold 9,000 m3 (320,000 cu ft) and feature a basin into which they decant. The cisterns are fed by a spring located 200 m (660 ft) away connected via an underground aqueduct.
A final network of secondary cisterns is located in the vicinity of the Aïn Doura Bath, in the south-west of the site.

Streets
Dougga's streets are not laid out as prescribed by the normal theoretical model of a Roman settlement—around a cardo and a decumanus—as a result of the city's unique design.
The center of the city was probably paved; the streets resembled meandering lanes. The city had sewers, as is evidenced by the access stones that are still in place in the streets. At the foot of the hill, there are traces of streets joining with the main road from Carthage to Theveste

Discoveries made at Dougga
The site at Dougga has offered up numerous works or art, many of which have been removed and placed in museums, most notably the Bardo National Museum in Tunis.

Works on site
Few works of art have been left on site, with the exception of a sculpture of a togate man (togatus) at the "Square of the Rose of the Winds" and a number of mosaics, including those in the building known as the house of Venus and in particular at the Aïn Doura Bath. This is a consequence of the discovery of Dougga's works of art at a time when archaeological sites were robbed of their treasures and abandoned after a dig. This approach has made it possible to preserve a certain number of mosaics with their colours intact; other mosaics that were uncovered but not removed have suffered due to their exposure to the elements.
A proposal to construct a museum on the site is being studied. It would serve in particular to house recent discoveries and those yet to be made.

Works at the Bardo National Museum
Statues
A number of heads of emperors have been discovered during the digs at the site. Amongst these, the portrait of Lucius Verus is particularly noteworthy: he is depicted with a generous head of hair, a full beard and a vivacity that makes it one of the most significant statues yet discovered in Roman Africa. This African masterpiece was realized in marble from Carrara and still has traces of color amongst the hairs.
The Bardo National Museum also houses a togate man (togatus) that dates from the 3rd century. It depicts an aged man, who has a short beard and is dressed in a toga. It seems certain that this is a later work of art reflective of the contemporary taste in art.

Mosaics
The "butler's mosaic" dating from the middle of the 3rd century features a drinking scene. Two characters are serving two others, who are much smaller, from amphoras on their shoulders. The two amphoras bear the letters ΡΙΕ (Rie, "Drink!" in Ancient Greek) and ΖΗϹΗϹ (Zēsēs, "You will live!"). The amphora bearers are flanked by another two characters, one of whom is carrying another amphora, the other of whom is carrying a branch of laurel and a basket of roses. This depiction is a greeting to all guests and a promise of hospitality. The same is true of another mosaic held at the museum which bears the phrase Omnia tibi felicia ("May everything please you").
The "mosaic of the victorious charioteer" is younger than these works. It dates from the second half of the 4th century, and features the phrase Eros omnia per te ("All things through you, Eros"). The depiction of the charioteer shows great attention to realism, as do the depictions of the horses, two of which are named Amandus and Frunitus after their characters. The horses are arranged symmetrically; such symmetries were very popular at the time. The charioteer is holding a whip, a crown made of branches and a palm branch. The starting blocks of the circus can be seen in the background. This work of art was found in a private residence and it appears that it must be interpreted as a monument donated by the owner celebrating the victory of a charioteer named Eros.
The "Ulysses mosaic" is a work inspired by the Odyssey: the Greek hero Odysseus (Ulysses to the Romans) is seen standing on a boat that is decorated with a human head and a palm branch and that has two sails and a battering ram. Ulysses's hands are tied to the main mast so that he will not succumb to the fatal charm of the sirens' music. Ulysses's companions are seated around him, their ears blocked with wax as described in the legend. Three sirens stand at the base of a rocky crag. They are depicted with the upper body of a woman but the wings and legs of a bird. One of them holds a flute, the second a lyre, while the third, who does not carry an instrument, is believed to be the singing siren. In front of Ulysses's boat, there is a small barque with a fisherman holding a lobster, the depiction of which is over-sized. The mosaic has been dated to around AD 260–268; it was discovered in the "House of Ulysses and the Pirates".
The mosaic "Neptune and the pirates" originates from the same peristyle as the preceding work. It depicts the punishment of pirates on the Tyrrhenian Sea, merging themes linked to Dionysus and more common marine themes. The god is standing, ready to throw his spear. He is supported by a maenad, a satyr and aged Silenus, who is holding the ship's rudder. A leopard is attacking one of the pirates, who are transformed into dolphins as soon as they recognize the divine nature of their adversary. To the left, genii have boarded another ship, while to the right, fishermen are attempting to catch an octopus with a net.
Yacoub attributes a protective function to these two scenes, a means of invoking fate, a practice which is probably based on Hellenic tradition.
The mosaic of the "cyclopses forging Jupiter's thunderbolts" from the floor of a frigidarium depicts three cyclopses: Brontes, Steropes, and Pyracmon or Arges. They are depicted naked, forging Jupiter's thunderbolts, which Vulcan, seated in front of them, is holding on an anvil. This last element has been lost. The mosaic dates to the end of the 3rd century and was discovered in the "Bath of the Cyclopses".

Works held in other museums
The bilingual inscription from the mausoleum taken by the British consul Read is held by the British Museum. The Punic-Libyan Inscription shows the same text in both the Punic and the Berber languages.

See also
Numidia
Carthage
Roman Africa
Roman colonies in Berber Africa

References
Citations
Bibliography
Ghaki, Mansour (2015), "Toponymie et Onomastique Libyques: L'Apport de l'Écriture Punique/Néopunique" (PDF), La Lingua nella Vita e la Vita della Lingua: Itinerari e Percorsi degli Studi Berberi, Studi Africanistici: Quaderni di Studi Berberi e Libico-Berberi, Naples: Unior, pp. 65–71, ISBN 978-88-6719-125-3, ISSN 2283-5636, archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-04-28, retrieved 2018-11-03. (in French)

Further reading
French
(in French) Aïcha Ben Abed-Ben Khader, Le musée du Bardo, éd. Cérès, Tunis, 1992 ISBN 9973-700-83-X
(in French) Claude Briand-Ponsart et Christophe Hugoniot, L'Afrique romaine. De l'Atlantique à la Tripolitaine. 146 av. J.-C. - 533 apr. J.-C., éd. Armand Colin, Paris, 2005 ISBN 2-200-26838-6
(in French) Gabriel Camps, « Dougga », L'Encyclopédie berbère, tome XVI, éd. Edisud, Aix-en-Provence, 1992, pp. 2522–2527 ISBN 2-85744-581-4
(in French) Gabriel Camps, Les Berbères, mémoire et identité, coll. Babel, éd. Actes Sud/Leméac, Paris/Montréal, 2007 ISBN 978-2-7427-6922-3
(in French) Michel Christol, Regards sur l'Afrique romaine, éd. Errance, Paris, 2005 ISBN 2-87772-313-5
(in French) Paul Corbier and Marc Griesheimer, L'Afrique romaine. 146 av. J.-C. - 439 apr. J.-C., éd. Ellipses, Paris, 2005 ISBN 2-7298-2441-3
(in French) Jacques Gascou, La politique municipale de l'empire romain en Afrique proconsulaire de Trajan à Septime Sévère, éd. CEFR, Rome, 1972
(in French) Jean-Claude Golvin, L'antiquité retrouvée, éd. Errance, Paris, 2003 ISBN 2-87772-266-X
(in French) Pierre Gros, L'architecture romaine du début du IIIe siècle à la fin du Haut-Empire, tome 1 « Monuments publics », éd. Picard, Paris, 1996 ISBN 2-7084-0500-4 *(in French) Pierre Gros, L'architecture romaine du début du IIIe siècle à la fin du Haut-Empire, tome 2 « Maisons, palais, villas et tombeaux », éd. Picard, Paris, 2001 ISBN 2-7084-0533-0
(in French) Christophe Hugoniot, Rome en Afrique. De la chute de Carthage aux débuts de la conquête arabe, éd. Flammarion, Paris, 2000 ISBN 2-08-083003-1
(in French) Mustapha Khanoussi, « L'évolution urbaine de Thugga (Dougga) en Afrique proconsulaire : de l'agglomération numide à la ville africo-romaine », CRAI (Comptes-rendus des séances de l'Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres), 2003, pp. 131–155
(in French) Mustapha Khanoussi, Dougga, éd. Agence de mise en valeur du patrimoine et de promotion culturelle, Tunis, 2008 ISBN 978-9973-954-33-6
(in French) Mustapha Khanoussi et Louis Maurin, Dougga (Thugga). Études épigraphiques, éd. Ausonius, Bordeaux, 1997
(in French) Mustapha Khanoussi et Louis Maurin, Dougga. Fragments d'histoire. Choix d'inscriptions latines éditées, traduites et commentées (Ier-IVe siècles), éd. Ausonius/Institut national du patrimoine, Bordeaux/Tunis, 2000
(in French) Mustapha Khanoussi et Louis Maurin [sous la dir. de], Mourir à Dougga. Recueil des inscriptions funéraires, éd. Ausonius, Bordeaux, 2002
(in French) Yann Le Bohec, Histoire de l'Afrique romaine, éd. Picard, Paris, 2005 ISBN 2-7084-0751-1
(in French) Édouard Lipinski [sous la dir. de], Dictionnaire de la civilisation phénicienne et punique, éd. Brépols, Paris, 1992 ISBN 2-503-50033-1
(in French) Ammar Mahjoubi, Villes et structures de la province romaine d'Afrique, éd. Centre de publication universitaire, Tunis, 2000 ISBN 9973-937-95-3
(in French) Guillemette Mansour, Tunisie, Musée à ciel ouvert, éd. Dad, Tunis, 2007 (deuxième édition) ISBN 978-9973-51-213-0
(in French) Sophie Saint-Amans, Topographie religieuse de Thugga (Dougga). Ville romaine d'Afrique proconsulaire (Tunisie), éd. Ausonius, Bordeaux, 2004 ISBN 2-910023-46-X
(in French) Hédi Slim et Nicolas Fauqué, La Tunisie antique. De Hannibal à saint Augustin, éd. Mengès, Paris, 2001 ISBN 2-85620-421-X
(in French) Yvon Thébert, Thermes romains d'Afrique du Nord et leur contexte méditerranéen, éd. École française de Rome, Rome, 2003 ISBN 2-7283-0398-3
(in French) Mohamed Yacoub, Splendeurs des mosaïques de Tunisie, éd. Agence nationale du patrimoine, Tunis, 1995 ISBN 9973-917-23-5
(in French) Collectif, La Tunisie, carrefour du monde antique, éd. Faton, Paris, 1995
(in French) Collectif, L'Afrique romaine. 69-439, éd. Atlande, Neuilly-sur-Seine, 2006 ISBN 2-35030-002-1
(in French) Il était une fois, Dougga...Tukka...ou...Thugga la Romaine, éd. Alyssa, Tunis, 1993

Other languages
(in Italian) Associazione storica Sant' Agostino. Africa romana: Douggha. Ed. Cassago Brianza. C. Brianza-Italy, 2009 ( Thugga la romana)
(in German) Mustapha Khanoussi et Volker Michael Strocka, THVGGA I. Grundlagen und Berichte, éd. Philipp von Zabern, Mayence, 2002 ISBN 3-8053-2892-3
(in English) Mustapha Khanoussi, Stefan Ritter et Philipp von Rummel, « The German-Tunisian project at Dougga. First results of the excavations south of the Maison du Trifolium », Antiquités africaines, vol. 40, 2004–2005, pp. 43–66.
(in German) Scheding, Paul (2019). Urbaner Ballungsraum im römischen Nordafrika. Zum Einfluss von mikroregionalen Wirtschafts- und Sozialstrukturen auf den Städtebau in der Africa Proconsularis [Urban agglomeration in Roman North Africa. On the influence of micro-regional economic and social structures on urban development in Africa Proconsularis]. Wiesbaden: Reichert, ISBN 978-3-95490-313-9 (with Dougga as one of five case studies).
(in German) Rainer Stutz, THVGGA II. Drei Hanghäuser in Thugga : maison des trois masques, maison du labyrinthe, maison de Dionysos et d'Ulysse, éd. Philipp von Zabern, Mayence, 2007 ISBN 3-8053-3758-2

External links

Portail sur le site de Dougga et sa région (in French)
Étude de l’architecture religieuse de Dougga (Ministère français des affaires étrangères) Archived 2011-01-01 at the Wayback Machine (in French)
Ausgrabungen in Thugga (Archäologisches Institut Freiburg) (in German)
Thugga University of Freiburg (in German)
Dougga: Roman Ruins Archived 2006-01-30 at the Wayback Machine Lexicorient
Dougga Site UNESCO World Heritage
Dougga information Dougga information
Photo Dougga photo
Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Thugga" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 736
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%AF%D9%82%D8%A9_(%D8%AA%D9%88%D9%86%D8%B3)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

دُقَّة هي مدينة أثرية (دقة الآثار) تقع في معتمدية تبرسق من ولاية باجة، بالشمال الغربي لتونس.
أُدْرِجت ضمن لائحة التراث العالمي لمنظمة اليونسكو سنة 1997، باعتبارها أفضل مدينة رومانية محفوظة في شمال أفريقيا. تموقع دقّة، وسط ضيعة فلاحيّة، جعلها محميّة من الزّحف العمراني، عكس قرطاج مثلا، التي نُهبت وتمّت إعادة بناءها العديد من المرّات.
تتميّز المدينة بامتدادها على مسافة 70 هكتارا، محافظتها على الآثار وبثراء تاريخها البونيقي، النّوميدي، الروماني والبيزنطي.
تستمد مدينة دقة اسمها الحالي من اسمها الأمازيغي القديم وهو تُوغًّا Thugga و يعني اسمها الجّبل الصّخري.

الموقع
تقع دقّة على بعد 5 كيلومترات من معتمديّة تبرسق و حوالي 108 كم من العاصمة تونس. شُيّدت المدينة على هضبة تطل على مناظر رائعة على هضاب، عيون جارية، حقول قمح وزيتون وسهول منها سهل وادي خلّاد، ويشهد موقعها على أوضاع
الإتّصال بين العالمين البونيقي والبربري، إذ تحيط بها من الشرق خنادق فوساريجيا ومن الشمال الشرقي جرف شديد الانحدار يسمَى جرف كاف دقّة، وهذا ما جعل منها موقع محصّن، لديه وضعيّة دفاعيّة جيّدة.

تاريخ المدينة
أصبح تاريخ دقّة معروفا، بعد الغزو الروماني، رغم وجود معالم فيها مثل المقبرة وضريح آتيبان بن أبتيمتاح والمعابد التي تمّ العثور عليها إثر الحفر والتي ترتبط بفترات ما قبل الفترة الرومانية. وتشهد هذه المعالم على أهميّة المدينة من قبل قدوم الرومان.

المدينة الإفريقية القديمة
الاسم النوميدي للمدينة TBGG والاسم اللوبي TBG يعني «يحمي» حسب غابرييل كامبس وبذلك تتّضح تسمية المدينة، من خلال خصائص الموقع إذ أنّه موقع يسهل الدّفاع عنه.
يعود تأسيس المدينة إلى القرن السّادس ق م. ويذهب بعض المؤرخين للاعتقاد بأنه من الممكن التّعرف على دقّة من خلال أغاثقلس، ملك صقلية، الذي أطلق عليها تسمية TOKAÎ وعرّفها على أنّها «المدينة جميلة من الحجم الكبير».

في جميع الأحوال، كان الاستيطان البشري للموقع، مبكّرا ومهمّا وقد اتّخذ شكلا حضاريّا ويتضح ذلك من خلال وجود مقابر بالمناطير. أقدم دليل أثري من دقة، مقام بعل آمون، لوحات تذكارية بونيقية ضريح، شظايا معمارية ومعبد مخصص لماسينيسا، تم العثور عليها خلال الحفريات.

اكتشاف الموقع
سنة 1631، زار الرّحّالة توماس داكروس دقّة وأخذ نقيشة أثريّة وقدّمها إلى أحد مواطنيه وهو العالم بيراز الذي انكّب على دراستها. حينها كانت دقة مخفية وسط ضيعة فلاحيّة صغيرة، ثم أصبحت منذ بداية القرن 18 م من أهمّ المواقع الأثريّة التي يرتادها الرحّالة الأوروبيّون في البلاد التونسيّة. فانطلقت الأبحاث بنسق حثيث منذ السنوات الأولى للحماية الفرنسيّة بتونس سنة 1881. وكانت الحصيلة حفر ثلث الموقع تقريبا لكن هذه الحفريات مكنت من إبراز عدد كبير من المعالم المتنوّعة والتي تعود إلى عدّة فترات تاريخيّة. ونجد من بينها معالم فريدة من نوعها جعلت من دقة موقعا خارقا للعادة.

المعالم الاثرية
توجد في المدينة الأثرية أطلال تمثل حقبا تاريخية متعاقبة، بدءا من الآثار الليبية القرطاجية، مثل ضريح آتيبان بن أبتيمتاح، مرورا بالمعابد الرومانية مثل معبد الكابيتول ومعبد ماركير (Mercure) الذي شُيّد في نهاية القرن الثاني وغيرهما، المسرح الرّوماني، بعض المقابر الرومانية، قصور، السّاحة والممرّات، أقواس النصر، حمامات عمومية، حمّامات ساخنة، منازل فخمة مفروشة بالفسيفساء، وانتهاء بالتحصينات البيزنطية. كما تكتسب دقة 2000 نقيشة لوبيّة، بونيّة محدثة، إغريقيّة ولاتينيّة.
ولعل ما يميز «دقة» عن أغلبية المواقع الأثرية الأخرى، هو أنها لم تتعرض للدمار بفعل الزلازل التي ضربت المنطقة، كما نجت من الغزو الروماني الذي أتى على العديد من المدن المجاورة. وبآثارها الغنية والفريدة من نوعها.

المسرح الروماني
يقع المسرح في مدخل المدينة الأثرية كانت تقام فيه المسرحيات والطقوس الدينيّة. يتكوّن المسرح من ثلاث أجزاء: المدارج، الأركسترا وخشبة المسرح ويتّسع لأكثر من 3000 متفرّج.

مبنى الكابيتول
يحنل أكبر مساحة من بين المباني الأخرى ويقع بجانب المسرح، وهو عبارة عن معبد لعبادة الثالوث الإلهي لمدينة روما، بني على النمط الروماني وبه مدرج يفتح على بوابة بأربع أسوار وساريتين في الداخل وفي الأعلى توجد نقشة تمثل رجلا محمولا على نسر. شُيد المبنى في بداية النصف الثاني من القرن الثاني ميلادي ويعود تاريخه بين 166 و167، وهو المبنى الذي كان يسكن فيه القيصر (الحاكم).

الضّريح
و هو ضريح آتيبان بن أبتيمتاح، أحد أمراء نوميديا ويبلغ طوله 21 مترا.

أصنام برؤوس مقطوعة
تمثّل الأصنام الأشخاص الذين عاشوا في تلك المدينة، التي تضم التاريخ الفينيقي والعمارة الرومانية، وتتميز الأصنام بكبر حجمها وبالرداء الفاتح الذي كان يرتديه الملوك ورجال المدينة.

لوحات الفسيفساء
تحتوي البيوت الرّومانيّة الموجودة بدقّة على لوحات فسيفساء أرضيّة كبيرة الحجم وملوّنة، كما توجد مجموعة أخرى من اللّوحات التي تمثّل ملامح الحياة اليومية (تنشيط، آلهة، أرباب، جلسات خمريّة...) كما نجد مشاهد ميثولوجيّة. تمكّن مختلف هذه العروض من تصور ومعرفة عقليّة السكّان الدقيين Thargenses. أكثر من عشرين لوحة منها معروضة ب المتحف الوطني بباردو.

مهرجان دڨة الدولي
هو مهرجان سنوي للموسيقى يقام كل سنة من يوم 25 يوليو إلى يوم 13 (توضيح) شهر أغسطس بالمسرح الرّوماني.

معرض الصور
انظر أيضا
مهرجان دڨة الدولي


== مراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 10,109
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dougga
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dougga (arabe : دڨة ) ou Thugga est un site archéologique situé dans la délégation de Téboursouk au Nord-Ouest de la Tunisie.
L'Unesco a classé ce site sur la liste du patrimoine mondial en 1997, considérant qu'il s'agit de la « petite ville romaine la mieux conservée de l'Afrique du Nord ». La cité, qui se trouve en pleine campagne, est bien protégée de l'urbanisme moderne, contrairement, par exemple, à Carthage pillée et reconstruite à de nombreuses reprises.
Le site de Dougga est remarquable par sa taille — 75 hectares — la bonne conservation de ses monuments et la richesse historique de son passé libyque, punique, numide, romano-africain et byzantin. Parmi les monuments qui font la renommée de Dougga se trouvent le mausolée libyco-punique, le Capitole, le théâtre ainsi que les temples de Saturne et de Junon Caelestis.

Étymologie
Le nom de Dougga aurait ainsi à l'origine la même racine berbère que d'autres noms de villes du Maghreb, tels que Béja et Béjaïa ou Ksar Baghaï (Bagaï) dans les Aurès. Béjaïa est un toponyme arabe dérivé du toponyme berbère (variante kabyle) Bgayet, notamment par translittération du son ǧ en dj (ج). Ce nom berbère — qui aurait été à l'origine Tabgayet, mais dont le t initial marquant le genre féminin serait tombé en désuétude — serait issu des mots tabegga, tabeɣayt, signifiant « ronces et mûres sauvages ».

Localisation et géologie
Le site archéologique se trouve à quelques kilomètres de la ville actuelle de Téboursouk, sur un plateau offrant une vue dégagée sur les plaines environnantes baignées par l'oued Khalled. La pente sur laquelle est bâtie la cité monte vers le nord et s'arrête à l'est par la falaise dite Kef Dougga. À l'est, les crêtes de la fossa regia témoignent de son statut de ville de contact entre mondes punique et berbère.
Le site offrait donc une protection naturelle qui peut expliquer l'ancienneté de son occupation.

Cité africaine progressivement romanisée
L'histoire de Dougga est surtout connue après la conquête romaine même si différents monuments pré-romains, comme une nécropole, le mausolée libyco-punique et des temples retrouvés grâce aux fouilles, attestent de l'importance de la ville avant l'arrivée des Romains.

Vieille cité africaine
Le nom numide de la cité est TBGG, du libyque TBG signifiant « protéger » selon Gabriel Camps. La toponymie viendrait ainsi de façon évidente de la topographie du site, un plateau aisé à défendre. La fondation de la ville semble remonter au VIe siècle av. J.-C.. Certains historiens considèrent qu'il est possible d'identifier Dougga à une certaine Tokaï prise par un lieutenant d'Agathocle de Syracuse à la fin du IVe siècle av. J.-C. : Diodore de Sicile la présente comme « une ville d'une belle grandeur ».

Quoi qu'il en soit, l'occupation humaine de ce site a été précoce et importante et a pris une forme urbaine comme en témoignent la présence d'une nécropole à dolmens, le plus ancien témoignage archéologique de Dougga, d'un sanctuaire à Ba'al Hammon, de stèles votives néo-puniques, du mausolée, de fragments architecturaux et d'un temple dédié à Massinissa divinisé dont des vestiges ont été retrouvés lors des fouilles.
Si les connaissances de la ville avant la conquête romaine restent très fragmentaires, l'archéologie a fortement renouvelé récemment la représentation qui a été faite de cette époque. Ainsi, l'identification du temple à Massinissa sous le forum a infirmé la théorie de Louis Poinssot qui situe la ville numide sur le plateau et l'imagine séparée de la nouvelle ville romaine. Le temple, élevé en 10 de Micipsa ce qui correspond à l'année 139 av. J.-C., mesure plus de 14 mètres de longueur sur 6,3 mètres de largeur. Il montre que le quartier du forum a été urbanisé avant l'arrivée des colons romains.

Un habitat du IIe siècle av. J.-C. a aussi été retrouvé à proximité. De même, le célèbre mausolée de Dougga n'est pas situé en pleine campagne mais dans une nécropole urbaine. En revanche, les fouilles récentes ont complètement bouleversé la chronologie de ce que l'on appelle couramment les « murailles numides ». Les murailles qui entourent Dougga ne sont en effet pas numides mais constituent une portion de la fortification de Dougga datant de l'Antiquité tardive. Des fouilles précises ont ainsi montré que ce qui est interprété comme deux tours numides dans la muraille sont en fait deux monuments funéraires d'époque numide réutilisés bien plus tard comme fondation et portion de l'enceinte à basse époque.
La découverte d'inscriptions libyques et puniques sur le site a entraîné un débat sur l'administration de la ville à l'époque du royaume numide, le cœur du débat — l'interprétation des sources épigraphiques — se situant dans la problématique de la prise en compte de l'influence punique ou d'un rapprochement avec les Berbères. Au-delà du débat sont apparues, dès l'époque numide, des institutions locales originales distinctes d'une quelconque influence punique. Cependant, Gabriel Camps signale la présence à l'époque romaine de suffètes dans plusieurs cités dont Dougga, ce qui ne peut manquer de dénoter une influence bien postérieure à la chute de Carthage, et donc une survivance d'éléments de sa civilisation.

Intégration progressive
En tant que vieille cité numide marquée par l'influence de Carthage, les Romains lui attribuent lors de leur conquête le statut de cité indigène (civitas).
La fondation de la colonie de Carthage sous le règne d'Auguste complique le statut institutionnel de Dougga. Celle-ci est en effet intégrée au territoire (pertica) de la colonie romaine de Carthage : un pagus (canton) de colons romains s'ajoute à la cité indigène. Pendant deux siècles, deux cadres civiques et institutionnels se partagent donc le même site urbain : la cité composée de pérégrins et le pagus composé de citoyens romains. Tous deux possèdent des institutions civiques : magistrats et conseil des décurions (ordo) pour la cité, conseil local à partir de la fin du Ier siècle et administrateurs locaux pour le pagus qui dépend en droit de la lointaine mais puissante colonie de Carthage.
Avec les progrès de la romanisation, les deux communautés se rapprochent : les notables de la cité pérégrine se romanisent et reçoivent la citoyenneté romaine et, de plus en plus souvent, les deux communautés représentées par leurs deux conseils prennent des décisions en commun. Ce rapprochement est facilité par le partage d'une même culture matérielle — les deux communautés ne sont pas distinguables d'un point de vue archéologique — puis par des aménagements institutionnels. Sous le règne de Marc Aurèle, la cité reçoit le droit latin : désormais l'intégration de ses magistrats à la citoyenneté romaine est automatique et le droit de ses habitants se rapproche de celui des citoyens romains. À la même époque, le pagus des citoyens gagne une certaine autonomie par rapport à Carthage et peut recevoir des legs et posséder une caisse publique.
Ce n'est cependant que sous le règne de Septime Sévère, en 205, que les deux entités fusionnent au sein d'un municipe dit libre alors que la pertica de Carthage est réduite. Soutenue par de grandes familles de riches notables pratiquant un évergétisme parfois fastueux, défendue par des ambassades auprès de l'empereur, la vie municipale à Dougga culmine alors et la cité obtient sous le règne de Gallien le titre de colonie romaine sous le nom de Colonia Licinia Septimia Aurelia Alexandriana Thuggensis. À partir du règne de Dioclétien et jusqu'à celui de Théodose l'Ancien, la cité est prospère comme en témoigne sa parure monumentale. Cependant, à partir du IVe siècle, la cité entre dans une certaine torpeur, le christianisme n'y ayant laissé que des traces modestes.

« Liberté » de Dougga
À partir de 205, date à laquelle la civitas et le pagus sont fondus en un seul municipe, Dougga porte le nom de Municipium Septimium Aurelium Liberum Thugga. Chaque terme d'une telle nomenclature est significatif.

Septimium et Aurelium renvoient aux noms des « fondateurs » (conditores) du municipe, la concession du statut juridique étant assimilée à la fondation d'une cité nouvelle : Septime Sévère et Caracalla dont la titulature latine est Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. En revanche, le terme de Liberum n'est pas aussi facilement interprétable. Outre le cas de Dougga, ce terme figure dans la titulature d'un certain nombre d'autres municipes créés à la même époque : Thibursicum Bure, Aulodes et Thysdrus.
Plusieurs interprétations ont été avancées. Pour Alfred Merlin et Louis Poinssot, il faut reconnaître là le nom du dieu Liber Pater, ce dernier ayant un temple à Dougga, l'épithète Liberum succédant dans ce cas aux noms de Frugifer et de Concordia, des divinités présentes dans la titulature de Thibursicum Bure. Mais ce dernier cas est une exception : la titulature des autres municipes concernés ne contient pas de noms de divinités et l'hypothèse a donc été abandonnée. Le terme de Liberum renvoie donc à la notion de libertas (liberté). Cette interprétation est confirmée par une inscription de Dougga où l'empereur Sévère Alexandre est honoré comme conservator libertatis, l'empereur ayant conservé la liberté de Dougga. Mais quel est le contenu exact de cette liberté et que recouvre-t-elle ?
Pour Jules Toutain, il s'agit d'un type de municipe particulier, des municipes libres où le gouverneur romain n'aurait pas eu le droit de contrôler les magistrats municipaux. Rien ne laisse penser toutefois que le municipe de Dougga a pu jouir de privilèges juridiques exceptionnels comme ceux que l'on trouve pour certaines cités libres telles que Aphrodisias en Asie Mineure. Paul Veyne a donc proposé de ne voir dans la libertas de Dougga qu'une liberté idéale sans contenu juridique : l'accession au statut de municipe est vue comme la fin d'une sujétion, la cité pouvant se parer des ornamenta libertatis et la célébration de sa liberté va de pair avec l'exaltation de sa dignité : l'empereur Probus est conservator libertatis et dignitatis.
Pour reprendre les mots de Jacques Gascou, selon l'interprétation de Paul Veyne, « Liberum, dans le nom de Thugga, est un terme flatteur [...] dont une cité qui a longtemps attendu le statut municipal se plaît à se parer ». Plus récemment toutefois, l'attention a été attirée sur les aspects concrets que peut recouvrir cette liberté. Ainsi, Claude Lepelley a fait remarquer d'une part que le terme de municipe libre doit faire référence aux rapports entre la cité et Rome et d'autre part que le terme de liberté peut recouvrir des privilèges divers et partiels. On sait que le territoire de Carthage, auquel appartient le pagus des citoyens romains jusqu'en 205, a de semblables privilèges : les habitants du pagus de Dougga envoient sous le règne de Trajan une ambassade pour défendre l'immunitas perticae Carthaginiensium, c'est-à-dire l'immunité (fiscale) du territoire de Carthage. En revanche, la civitas de Dougga ne possède pas un tel privilège : toute fusion avec le pagus risque d'entraîner la perte d'une situation enviable pour les citoyens du pagus. La liberté des municipes sévériens désignerait donc l'immunité fiscale étendue à tout le municipe à l'occasion de la fusion, immunité permise par la générosité de Septime Sévère et la très grande richesse de la région. Sous le règne de Gallien, l'un des grands personnages de Dougga nommé Aulus Vitellius Felix Honoratus effectua une ambassade auprès de l'empereur « pour assurer la liberté publique ». Pour Claude Lepelley, cela laisse penser que le privilège a été remis en question même si Dougga a finalement eu gain de cause, au moins partiellement, comme en témoigne l'inscription honorant « Probus, défenseur de sa liberté ».

Pour Michel Christol, cette interprétation réduit cependant le sens du mot libertas à des situations trop concrètes. Selon lui, il ne faut pas oublier que la décision de l'empereur en 205 doit répondre à une demande venant de la civitas et tenir compte des relations qui ont pu exister entre celle-ci et le pagus. L'autonomie acquise par la civitas, sous le règne de Marc Aurèle, et la concession du droit latin ont en effet rendu la perspective de la fusion des deux communautés possible mais sans doute inquiétante pour le pagus qui aurait exprimé un « souci de défense et même de refus, devant les prétentions des voisins les plus proches ». Cela expliquerait que ce dernier a honoré Commode comme conservator pagi (conservateur protecteur) du pagus.
Dès lors, l'apparition du terme Liberum serait à comprendre dans ce contexte et le terme de liberté retrouverait un aspect abstrait : la liberté est ce qui se dégage de l'appartenance à une cité et le mot de Liberum permet d'exprimer la fin de la dépendance pour la civitas, « l'élévation à la liberté des Romains d'une communauté pérégrine » qui peut effacer aussi les craintes des habitants du pagus et ouvrir, à terme, la voie vers la promotion ultime, c'est-à-dire le titre de colonie. Cette promotion a eu lieu sous le règne de Gallien, en 261, à la suite, selon Michel Christol, de l'ambassade d'Aulus Vitellius Felix Honoratus. Dès lors, la défense de la libertas publica par ce dernier ne serait pas à comprendre comme la défense d'un privilège menacé mais comme la demande de la « liberté suprême » (summa libertas) qu'est la promotion coloniale. Michel Christol attire aussi l'attention sur le caractère abstrait de termes tels que libertas ou dignitas : les situations vécues par les cités étaient en revanche plus concrètes et chaque fois singulières.

Plan général de la cité
La cité telle qu'elle se présente aujourd'hui consiste essentiellement en des vestiges d'époque romaine datant principalement des IIe et IIIe siècles. Les constructions romaines ont dû prendre en compte à la fois le relief du terrain particulièrement accidenté et les constructions préexistantes, ne respectant pas de ce fait le plan orthonormé traditionnel, particulièrement en œuvre dans les créations telles que la cité de Timgad.
Les fouilles récentes confirment la continuité de l'emprise urbaine de la cité. Le cœur de la cité resta le point culminant de la colline au cours de son histoire, le forum romain succédant à l'agora numide. Au fur et à mesure de son développement, les constructions occupèrent le flanc de la colline, la ville devant apparaître selon Hédi Slim comme « une masse compacte ».

Cité des vivants
Les premières habitations privées qui sont dégagées le sont le plus souvent au début des fouilles, du fait des sondages effectués afin de découvrir les constructions publiques. Par la suite, un certain nombre de fouilles a permis de mettre en évidence quelques bâtisses privées particulièrement caractéristiques.

Habitat d'époque numide
Des traces d'habitat d'époque numide ont été décelées dans les soubassements de l'auditorium du temple de Liber Pater mais sont très ténues. Les premiers archéologues, dont Louis Poinssot, pensent à une localisation différente des villes romaine et pré-romaine, ce qui a été infirmé par cette découverte, la ville ayant eu vraisemblablement une emprise sur la même zone.

Exemple de maison patricienne : la villa du trifolium
L'habitat de la ville des IIe et IIIe siècles se situe en contrebas de la ville haute qui abrite le forum ainsi que les principaux monuments publics de la ville, autour de rues au tracé irrégulier.
La villa dite du trifolium, du nom d'une pièce en forme de trèfle qui sert sans doute de triclinium, est la plus grande maison privée fouillée à l'heure actuelle sur le site de Dougga. Elle possède deux étages mais il ne reste presque rien du second niveau. Située au sud du site, à mi-hauteur de la pente naturelle, elle est particulièrement intéressante car elle épouse le relief du terrain : le vestibule descend vers une cour autour de laquelle s'ordonnent les différentes pièces.

Marché
Le marché (macellum) daté du milieu du Ier siècle est constitué d'une place de 35,50 mètres sur 28 mètres, entourée de portiques et de boutiques sur deux de ses côtés. Le côté nord est bordé par un portique et une exèdre qui occupe sa partie sud doit abriter une statue de Mercure.
Afin de pallier les différences de relief, les bâtisseurs ont procédé à d'importants travaux de terrassement. La datation des vestiges en fait l'un des apports romains les plus anciens et son orientation par rapport au forum laisse supposer l'absence de plan de construction préalable. Il ne faut toutefois pas se laisser méprendre par la proximité actuelle des vestiges car il n'y a aucune connexion avec le forum.
Lors des travaux d'aménagement du fortin byzantin, le marché a été presque complètement démoli. Il a été fouillé et dégagé en 1918-1919.

Cité des morts
Dolmens
La présence de dolmens en Afrique du Nord a alimenté des débats historiographiques qui ne sont pas dénués d'arrière-pensées idéologiques. Les dolmens présents sur le site de Dougga ont fait l'objet de fouilles, des squelettes ainsi que des céramiques modelées ainsi ont pu être découverts.

Même si leur datation pose un problème, du fait d'une utilisation qui a pu perdurer jusqu'au début de l'ère chrétienne, il est probable que celle-ci ne soit pas postérieure aux deux premiers millénaires av. J.-C.. Gabriel Camps a envisagé une origine sicilienne pour ce type de sépulture ainsi que pour les sépultures dites haouanet.

Tombes à bazina d'époque numide
Un type de tombe propre au monde numide a été découvert sur le site : il s'agit des tombes dites à bazina ou monuments circulaires.

Mausolée libyco-punique
Il s'agit de l'un des très rares exemples d'architecture royale numide, un autre exemple se situant à Sabratha dans l'actuelle Libye. Certains auteurs y ont vu une parenté avec l'architecture funéraire d'Asie Mineure et les nécropoles alexandrines des IIIe et IIe siècles av. J.-C..
Ce tombeau de 21 mètres de haut bâti au IIe siècle av. J.-C. a été considéré comme dédié à Atban, fils de Iepmatath et de Palu, d'après le texte de l'inscription qui a été conservée. Cette inscription dont la localisation précise au sein du monument, sur un côté d'une fausse fenêtre du podium, n'a été tranchée que récemment n'est pas la seule car une autre inscription bilingue ornant l'autre côté de la fausse fenêtre a pour sa part été perdue. Selon ces dernières études, les noms cités ne seraient que ceux ayant construit la bâtisse, ceux de l'architecte et de représentants de divers corps de métiers. Le monument aurait été bâti par les habitants de la cité pour un prince numide, certains y ayant vu le tombeau ou un cénotaphe à destination de Massinissa.
On accède au tombeau par un piédestal de cinq marches. Sur la face nord du podium, premier des trois étages, une fenêtre fermée par une dalle ouvre la chambre funéraire. Les autres faces sont décorées de fausses fenêtres, les quatre pilastres d'angle étant d'ordre éolique.
Le second niveau est constitué d'une colonnade ayant la forme d'un temple (naïskos), les colonnes engagées flanquant chaque côté étant d'ordre ionique. Le troisième et dernier niveau est le plus richement décoré : outre des pilastres d'angle similaires à ceux du premier niveau, il se termine par un pyramidion. Des éléments de statuaire perdurent également. En 1842, afin de détacher l'inscription royale qui l'orne, le consul britannique à Tunis, sir Thomas Reade, endommage très gravement le monument qui ne doit son état actuel qu'à un archéologue français, Louis Poinssot, qui en entreprit une véritable reconstruction à partir des éléments qui jonchent le sol. L'inscription bilingue libyque et punique qui se trouve quant à elle au British Museum a permis de déchiffrer les caractères libyques.

Sépultures d'époque romaine
Les sépultures d'époque romaine qui ont fait l'objet de dégagements sont aujourd'hui en partie gagnées par l'espace occupé par les oliviers.

Les diverses zones de nécropoles délimitent la zone d'habitation même si cette délimitation n'est pas si simple. On trouve cinq espaces identifiés comme nécropoles : la première au nord-est, autour du temple de Saturne et de l'église de Victoria, la seconde au nord-ouest, zone qui inclut également les dolmens présents sur le site, la troisième à l'ouest, entre les citernes d'Aïn Mizeb et d'Aïn El Hammam et au nord du temple de Junon Caelestis, la quatrième et la cinquième au sud et au sud-est, l'une autour du mausolée libyco-punique, l'autre autour de l'arc de triomphe de Septime Sévère.

Hypogée
L'hypogée est un édifice à demi-enterré, datant du IIIe siècle, bâti au milieu d'une nécropole plus ancienne et qui a été fouillé en 1913. Destiné à accueillir des urnes funéraires dans de petites niches aménagées dans les parois, il contient lors de sa découverte des sarcophages suggérant une longue utilisation.

Édifices politiques
Arcs
Le site de Dougga possède encore deux arcs dans un état de conservation inégal.
L'arc de Septime Sévère, très endommagé, se situe à proximité du mausolée libyco-punique et se trouve relié à la voie menant de Carthage à Théveste. Son érection est datée de l'année 205.
Quant à l'arc de Sévère Alexandre, daté des années 222-235, il est relativement bien conservé — en dépit de la perte de ses parties supérieures — et se situe à égale distance du Capitole et du temple de Junon Caelestis. Son arcade mesure quatre mètres.
Un dernier arc datant de la Tétrarchie a quant à lui complètement disparu.

Forum
Le forum de la cité avec ses 924 m2 est à la fois petit et inégalement préservé, la forteresse byzantine ayant endommagé une grande partie des bâtiments le constituant. Le Capitole intégré sur l'aire entourée de portiques écrase en quelque sorte les autres éléments de par sa présence imposante, et au premier chef tout autre élément pouvant être utilisé par les institutions locales. La présence de la place de la Rose des vents — du nom de l'élément de décoration y figurant — ne parvient pas à donner de l'espace à cette place publique et ne sert en quelque sorte que comme esplanade au temple de Mercure la bordant au nord. Sur l'un des côtés de la place doit se situer la curie de la cité ainsi qu'une tribune aux harangues.
Très longtemps, les archéologues ont pensé à une création ex nihilo mais cette thèse est clairement contredite par la présence d'un sanctuaire dédié à Massinissa divinisé dont les substructions ont été dégagées récemment à l'arrière du Capitole.

Édifices de loisirs
Théâtre
Ce type d'édifice apparaît dès le règne d'Auguste comme un élément fondamental de la parure monumentale d'une cité.
Le théâtre, construit en 168 ou 169, est l'un des mieux conservés d'Afrique romaine et peut accueillir 3 500 spectateurs alors que Dougga ne compte que 5 000 habitants. Il appartient à une série de bâtiments publics impériaux dont la construction s'étale sur deux siècles et qui ne présentent que peu de différences par rapport à un modèle théorique, si ce n'est l'adaptation au terrain, des aménagements mineurs ou l'ornementation pour lesquels les architectes locaux ont pu avoir quelque liberté.
D'un diamètre de 63,5 m, le théâtre s'appuie sur une colline. La cavea atteint une hauteur de 15 m et compte trois séries de gradins, neuf grands au premier niveau, six au second et quatre au niveau supérieur, soit 19 gradins au total. L'orchestra est inhabituellement petit (huit mètres de diamètre), en raison de la place prise par les cinq rangs très larges de sièges réservés aux notables. La scène mesure 36,75 m de largeur pour 5,5 m de profondeur. Le mur de scène a presque complètement disparu, il n'en subsiste qu'un soubassement avec trois exèdres, ouverts sur les trois entrées des acteurs, et plusieurs colonnes qui encadraient ces entrées.
Une dédicace, gravée sur le fronton de la scène et sur le portique qui domine la ville, rappelle son constructeur, P. Marcius Quadratus, qui « a construit de ses deniers pour sa patrie » l'édifice et offert à l'occasion de la dédicace « des représentations scéniques, des distributions de vivre, un festin et des jeux gymniques ».
Le théâtre est encore animé de pièces classiques notamment lors du Festival international de Dougga et fait l'objet de travaux de conservation.

Auditorium
Le lieu dénommé auditorium est une annexe du temple de Liber Pater qui doit vraisemblablement servir de lieu pour l'initiation de novices. Ce n'est donc un lieu de spectacle que par la forme du bâtiment, un petit théâtre de 20 mètres sur 20 mètres, et non par la fonction qui lui est dévolue.

Cirque
La cité possède un cirque romain destiné aux courses de chars mais celui-ci n'est plus guère visible sur le site au travers d'une longue dépression au nord-ouest. Au départ, le lieu n'est pas réellement construit : l'inscription du temple de la Victoire germanique de Caracalla, qui nous apprend qu'il s'agit d'un terrain donné par les Gabinii en 214, l'évoque comme un ager qui appellatur circus (champ qui tient lieu de cirque). En 225 toutefois, il est aménagé et construit aux frais des édiles à la suite d'une promesse de leur part et sur la demande du peuple tout entier. Cette construction chercha à tirer le plus possible parti de la topographie, souci d'économie compréhensible pour une ville moyenne aux revenus limités mais aussi sans doute volonté de finir au plus vite les travaux, les magistrats n'exerçant qu'un mandat annuel. La construction doit avoir cependant « quelque envergure » et, avec une longueur de 393 mètres et une spina longue de 190 mètres et large de 6 mètres, elle est assez exceptionnelle en Afrique du Nord : Dougga prend place avec ce bâtiment parmi les plus importantes cités de la province, aux côtés de Carthage, Thysdrus, Leptis Magna, Hadrumète et Utique. Le don du terrain pour le plaisir du peuple (ad voluptatem populi) et son aménagement à la suite de la demande du peuple tout entier (postulante universo populo) rappellent l'importance des spectacles dans la vie sociale des cités et l'exigence du divertissement populaire.

Amphithéâtre
La question de la présence d'un amphithéâtre de Dougga n'est pas définitivement tranchée. Traditionnellement, une vaste dépression située au nord-ouest du site et de forme elliptique est interprétée comme le site d'un amphithéâtre. Les archéologues actuels sont toutefois beaucoup plus prudents sur la question.

Thermes
Trois espaces thermaux ont été totalement dégagés alors qu'un autre est en cours de fouilles. Parmi ces quatre thermes, l'un est inclus dans une maison privée, les « thermes de la maison à l'ouest du temple de Tellus ».
Deux autres, les thermes d'Aïn Doura et les thermes longtemps dénommés « thermes liciniens », sont des lieux ouverts au public au vu de leur superficie. Le dernier lieu, les thermes des Cyclopes, est plus complexe à interpréter.

Thermes des Cyclopes
Au cours du dégagement des thermes des Cyclopes a été découverte la mosaïque des cyclopes forgeant les foudres de Jupiter qui est exposée désormais au musée national du Bardo. Des latrines en très bon état de conservation y sont également visibles. L'édifice a été daté du IIIe siècle de par l'étude de cette mosaïque.
La taille de l'édifice, avec un frigidarium de moins de 30 m2 a poussé certains à en faire un espace thermal privé. Cependant, le rattachement à une domus dans son environnement immédiat pose un problème, la « villa du trifolium » étant éloignée et les autres vestiges les plus proches étant d'une interprétation difficile de par la médiocrité de leur état de conservation. Yvon Thébert opte donc pour l'hypothèse d'en faire des bains de quartier.

Thermes antoniniens ou liciniens
Quant aux thermes antoniniens du IIIe siècle, ils ont été longtemps appelés liciniens, avec une construction datant du règne de Gallien, et possèdent encore plusieurs étages. L'identification réalisée par Louis Poinssot, basée sur la prospérité de Dougga à l'époque et sur l'interprétation d'inscriptions lacunaires, a été remise en cause par les recherches récentes en particulier celles de Michel Christol. Ce dernier a proposé une datation du règne de Caracalla désormais confirmée par l'épigraphie. D'autres ont même avancé une datation du règne des Sévères, du fait d'une particularité qui se répand un siècle plus tard en Occident, les colonnes situées dans le péristyle nord-ouest portant des dais supportant eux-mêmes des arcs.
Les thermes sont transformés en huilerie à une époque inconnue.
De taille moyenne, le plan de l'édifice est symétrique et de taille moyenne avec environ 1 700 m2 de superficie hors les palestres, dont 175 m2 pour le seul frigidarium. La construction a nécessité de gros travaux de nivellement et de remblai de la pente, cet élément pouvant expliquer la différence de conservation car l'espace bâti sur le remblai a largement disparu.

Thermes d'Aïn Doura
Dans l'environnement immédiat d'Aïn Doura se trouve un espace en voie de dégagement qui pourrait révéler les thermes les plus grands de la ville. La datation proposée pour la construction de cet ensemble est la fin du IIe siècle et le début du IIIe siècle, selon le style des mosaïques retrouvées, avec une phase de réaménagement du seul décor mosaïcal au IVe siècle.
L'ensemble thermal est très incomplètement fouillé mais il apparaît, selon Yvon Thébert, qu'il s'agit d'un ensemble à plan symétrique dont seule une portion des salles froides a été dégagée.

Thermes de la maison à l'ouest du temple de Tellus
Ce petit espace thermal de 75 m2, accessible depuis la maison et la rue, a été dégagé au début du XXe siècle. Yvon Thébert n'en propose pas de datation mais l'analyse archéologique de sa relation avec la maison l'abritant lui a fait énoncer qu'il résulterait d'un aménagement postérieur à la construction primitive.

Édifices religieux
La petite cité est dotée d'un nombre important de temples. Plus d'une vingtaine de temples sont attestés archéologiquement ou épigraphiquement : onze temples le sont par l'épigraphie et l'archéologie, huit ne sont connus que par l'archéologie et quatorze ne le sont que par l'épigraphie. Cette multiplication est due en particulier aux manifestations d'évergétisme de familles aisées.

Temple de Massinissa divinisé
Le temple de Massinissa divinisé se situe sur la bordure occidentale du Capitole. Les vestiges sont identifiés par les premiers fouilleurs comme ceux d'une fontaine monumentale, bien qu'une inscription monumentale prouvant l'existence d'un sanctuaire au défunt roi numide a été mise au jour dès 1904. Cette inscription est datée de 139 av. J.-C., sous le règne de Micipsa.
Les vestiges possèdent une parenté architecturale avec le temple de Chemtou et témoignent de la même localisation entre le centre politique de la ville romaine et l'agora hellénistique. Les vestiges lapidaires retrouvés dans le secteur du forum semblent appartenir à plusieurs édifices de même époque, alors que la localisation précise du sanctuaire est encore débattue.
En outre, l'idée d'un tel sanctuaire qui divinise le souverain n'est pas acceptée par tous les chercheurs : Stéphane Gsell y voit un prolongement des pratiques orientales et hellénistiques, alors que Gabriel Camps nuance cette thèse en se fondant sur l'absence de sources antiques témoignant autre chose qu'un simple respect des sujets envers leur roi. L'édifice serait uniquement un lieu de mémoire, un lieu de culte funéraire. La construction après dix ans de règne s'expliquerait par son sens politique : Micipsa, seul à régner après le décès de ses frères Gulussa et Mastanabal, aurait ainsi affirmé l'unité de son royaume autour de la personne du roi.

Capitole
Le Capitole est un temple romain du IIe siècle principalement dédié à la triade protectrice de Rome : Jupiter Optimus Maximus, Junon Regina et Minerve Augusta. Il est dédié de manière secondaire à la sauvegarde des empereurs Lucius Aurelius Verus et Marc Aurèle ; il a sans doute été achevé en 166-167 vu leur titulature.
Identifié comme temple de Jupiter dès le XVIIe siècle par Thomas d'Arcos, l'édifice fait l'objet d'études dès la fin du XIXe siècle, en particulier par le docteur Louis Carton en 1893. Les murs en opus africanum et l'entablement du portique ont été restaurés entre 1903 et 1910. Claude Poinssot y a découvert une crypte sous le sol de la cella en 1955. Les derniers travaux ont été effectués par l'Institut national du patrimoine tunisien entre 1994 et 1996.
L'état de conservation exceptionnel du site peut s'expliquer par son inclusion dans une fortification byzantine. Un escalier de onze marches mène au portique de façade. Les colonnes corinthiennes de la façade s'élèvent à huit mètres de haut, au-dessus desquelles se trouve le fronton en parfait état. Il conserve une représentation de l'apothéose de l'empereur Antonin le Pieux enlevé par un aigle.
Le fond de la cella comporte encore les emplacements pour trois statues destinées au culte. Dans celui du centre se dresse une statue colossale de Jupiter. Pour la crypte, la découverte d'une tête de statue de Jupiter a fait envisager à Claude Poinssot une datation de l'époque du triomphe du christianisme. Sophie Saint-Amans n'exclut pas un aménagement du temps de la construction de la citadelle byzantine, le forum et le Capitole en constituant le centre névralgique.
La construction du Capitole de Dougga est concomitante avec celle d'autres édifices du même type en Afrique du Nord. Cette vague peut s'expliquer, selon Pierre Gros, par une plus grande proximité du culte impérial et de celui de Jupiter.
Aux abords se situent la place de la Rose des vents — du nom des divers vents soufflant à cet endroit et gravés sur le pavage — ainsi que les vestiges de la citadelle byzantine qui reprend une partie des ruines à l'époque tardive du recul de la cité.

Temple de Mercure
Le temple de Mercure est dédié également à Tellus et fait face au marché de la cité dont il est séparé par la place de la Rose des vents. Très ruiné, il possède trois cellae. Il ne comporte pas de cour et le sanctuaire est établi sur un faible podium, un escalier de quatre marches en permettant l'accès. Il a été fouillé et consolidé entre 1904 et 1908.

Temple de la Piété Auguste
Le petit temple de la Piété Auguste a été bâti sous le règne d'Hadrien, grâce à  l'évergétisme d'un certain Caius Pompeius Nahanius. Il fait face à la place de la Rose des vents. Il en subsiste une partie du vestibule alors qu'à l'arrière, sur les soubassements du temple de Fortuna, Vénus Concordia et Mercure, a été construite une petite mosquée, seul vestige subsistant de nos jours du petit village qui a perduré jusqu'à la construction de la Nouvelle Dougga.
Il a été identifié dès 1631 par Thomas d'Arcos grâce à une inscription encore en place à cette époque. Le podium en est relativement bas (1 mètre à 1,5 mètre) et un accès se fait par sept marches se présentant sur le côté sud.

Temple de Minerve
Le culte de Minerve a été à l'honneur dans la cité de Dougga, puisque deux sanctuaires y sont consacrés. Un premier temple de la fin du Ier siècle lui a été offert par le patron de la civitas.
Mais le lieu le plus important consacré à cette divinité est l'édifice qui comporte un temple et une aire entourée de portiques datant du règne d'Antonin le Pieux. Il est dû à l'évergétisme d'une prêtresse du culte impérial ou flaminique perpétuelle Iulia Paula Laenatiana. Il utilise la pente du terrain car le podium se situe au niveau des toits des portiques et le temple stricto sensu se situe hors de la place, l'escalier d'accès empiétant sur celle-ci et accentuant l'aspect inaccessible de la divinité.

Temple des Victoires de Caracalla
Parmi les édifices religieux, le temple des Victoires de Caracalla est le seul édifice dédié au culte impérial à avoir été localisé avec précision. Connu dès 1835 par les fragments de l'inscription de son linteau, il n'a été identifié qu'en 1966. Il est adossé à un nymphée monumental datant du règne de Commode. Le nom exact du temple a été précisé par la découverte de nouveaux fragments de son inscription à la fin des années 1990 ; l'appellation qui était auparavant retenue était celle de « temple de la Victoire germanique ».

L'édifice, de taille relativement limitée, a un plan original. Long de 41,5 mètres et large de 14,2 mètres, le temple est situé le long de la voie descendant du forum aux thermes d'Aïn Dora. Il occupe toute la largeur de la cour où il se trouve et est associé à un arc de triomphe qui enjambe la voie qui le longe. Devant le perron du temple, la cour s'organise autour d'un pavement en croix définissant quatre bassins recueillant les eaux de pluie. À l'intérieur du sanctuaire, la cella comporte six niches latérales accueillant des bases pour les statues d'Apollon, Liber Pater, Neptune, Mercure et de deux dieux dont on a perdu la trace. La façade, qui donne sur la cour, et les deux autres côtés sont mitoyens. Le temple est visible de loin, mais n'offre au passant que la face visible et très allongée de la cella, posée sur un soubassement en grand appareil à bossage et rythmée par sept colonnes jusqu'à la porte latérale donnant sur le perron. Le temple est d'ordre toscan tétrastyle in antis. Il s'agit d'un dispositif original : les temples du culte impérial sont en général d'ordre corinthien, placés au centre d'une vaste cour à portiques ; l'ordre toscan est ainsi très rare en province. Le temple des Victoires témoigne donc de la volonté de construire un édifice différent des autres, sans doute en réponse aux contraintes du terrain. On connaît les circonstances de sa construction grâce à sa dédicace très précisément datée de 214 qui consacre le temple aux Victoires divinisées — il s'agissait sans doute des victoires britannique, parthique et germanique de l'empereur — pour le salut de Caracalla et de sa mère Julia Domna.
Le texte se fait l'écho des projets militaires du fils de Septime Sévère et de leur célébration dans le cadre du culte impérial. Cette inscription enseigne aussi que la construction du temple, pour une valeur de 100 000 sesterces, a été ordonnée dans son testament par une grande dame de Dougga nommée Gabinia Hermiona. Outre la munificence de cet acte d'évergétisme, le testament prévoit aussi, aux frais de ses héritiers, un banquet annuel offert aux décurions au jour anniversaire de la dédicace du temple. En même temps, Hermiona lègue « pour le plaisir du peuple » le terrain du cirque.
Le temple occupe sans doute l'une des dernières places libres à proximité du forum. La donatrice a préféré ce terrain au centre de la ville à ceux qu'elle possède en périphérie : celui du cirque ou celui sur lequel est plus tard bâti le temple à Céleste. La famille de Gabinia, l'une des plus grandes et des plus riches familles de Dougga, est implantée parmi les notables de Carthage et conserva sa puissance à Dougga, même durant le resserrement de l'aristocratie locale au IIIe siècle : les termes mêmes du testament de Gabinia témoignent bien de ce souci de permanence, le banquet annuel conservant la mémoire de la générosité de la famille et mettant en scène la sociabilité des notables comme le cirque ordonne les plaisirs des habitants les plus humbles.
À la fin du IVe siècle, le temple des Victoires est transformé en église, les bassins de la cour sont comblés pour offrir de la place aux fidèles et des chancels sont ajoutés dans la cella qui voit aussi sa décoration modifiée.

Temple dit « de Pluton »
Pluton est particulièrement honoré à Dougga comme divinité poliade, ce que montre son Genius Thuggae, le génie de Dougga.
Le temple dit « de Pluton » se trouve à proximité de l'arc de triomphe de Septime Sévère, dans un quartier peu dégagé jusqu'à présent. Cependant, l'hypothèse est très fragile et ne repose que sur la découverte d'un buste dans la cour, qui a été daté par Claude Poinssot des IIe et IIIe siècles, découverte que les dernières recherches ne retiennent plus comme probantes. L'édifice a été fouillé dans les années 1960 et les conditions du dégagement et des stabilisations de l'édifice sont obscures. Au milieu d'une cour, sur un podium, se trouve une cella munie d'une seule niche. L'autel a également été conservé.
Une étude architecturale a eu lieu entre 2000 et 2002 mais n'a pas conduit à des fouilles étendues. Une fouille pratiquée en 2001, au voisinage de l'autel, a montré que le quartier était probablement occupé à l'époque pré-romaine. Le sanctuaire présente deux états distincts, la cour ayant été agrandie dans le second état, peut-être dans des opérations d'embellissement du quartier lors de la construction de l'arc de Septime Sévère.

Temple de Saturne
Saturne est l'héritier du Ba'al Hammon punique et le parèdre de Tanit ou Junon Caelestis. À l'époque romaine, la ville de Dougga possède au moins deux sanctuaires dédiés à Saturne. L'un d'eux est surtout connu par des documents épigraphiques. Le second, que l'on désigne couramment comme le temple de Saturne de Dougga, a été bien dégagé par les recherches archéologiques.
Les vestiges de ce temple, peu importants comparés à ceux du Capitole et du temple de Junon Caelestis, sont particulièrement intéressants par leur environnement, les ruines se dressant sur un promontoire avec vue sur la riche vallée céréalière de l'oued Khalled, à 160 mètres du théâtre, hors des limites de la ville. Lors des fouilles ont été découverts les vestiges d'un temple de Ba'al Hammon, en particulier des favissæ contenant des ex-votos. Le temple construit à l'époque romaine succède donc à un sanctuaire autochtone remontant au moins au IIe siècle av. J.-C. Ce sanctuaire est essentiellement constitué d'une vaste place à ciel ouvert accueillant les ex-voto et les sacrifices. Il a été remblayé pour permettre la construction du temple de Saturne dont les ruines sont aujourd'hui visibles.
La construction date du règne de Septime Sévère. Elle est constituée de trois cellae, d'une cour à portiques et d'un vestibule. L'eau des toits est récupérée dans des citernes. Les circonstances sont connues grâce à une inscription : le temple a été érigé à la suite d'un legs d'un notable local, nommé Lucius Octavius Victor Roscianus, pour un coût d'au moins 150 000 sesterces, prix qui semble élevé et s'explique peut-être par l'importance des remblais nécessaires, qui n'ont cependant pas réussi à donner au monument une assise suffisante : restaurations et consolidations paraissent avoir été nombreuses avant la ruine finale.

Temple de Junon Caelestis
Le temple de Junon Caelestis, bâti à la périphérie de la ville, a été décrit dès le XVIIe siècle et dégagé au cours des années 1890. Des restaurations importantes ont été entreprises entre 1904 et 1914, et de nouvelles études menées à nouveau entre 1999 et 2002.

Le temple, dédié à Junon Caelestis, héritière de la Tanit punique, est remarquable en raison de l'état de conservation de son enceinte sacrée (temenos) délimitée par un mur dont une partie importante est très bien conservée. La cour est pavée en partie seulement et s'ouvre par deux portes symétriques. Un portique de 25 travées borde la partie circulaire de l'enceinte. Il est surmonté par une frise relatant sa construction.
Le temple au sens strict se situe sur un haut podium auquel on accède par un escalier de onze marches. Il est périptère et hexastyle de l'ordre corinthien. Le fronton porte une dédicace à Sévère Alexandre. La cella a quant à elle totalement disparu.
On sait que la construction, étalée de 222 à 235, a été payée par un certain Q. Gabinius Rufus Felix qui y fit en outre déposer deux statues d'argent de la déesse d'un coût de 35 000 sesterces.
La forme de l'enceinte de ce temple du IIIe siècle de 52 mètres de diamètre évoquerait un croissant de lune, symbole de la divinité.

Édifice dénommé Dar Lacheb
L'édifice dénommé Dar Lacheb (maison de Lacheb) n'a pas été clairement identifié même si Sophie Saint-Amans opte pour un sanctuaire dédié à Esculape, dans la continuité de l'hypothèse de Claude Poinssot qui y voit un temple.
Dégagé dès la fin du XIXe siècle par Louis Carton, il n'a plus fait l'objet de travaux depuis 1912. Une maison bâtie en utilisant des vestiges antiques réemployés s'y trouve mais a été détruite dès le début du XXe siècle.
Il a été construit entre 164 et 166 et se trouve donc contemporain du Capitole, situé à 50 mètres de là. La porte d'accès à l'édifice est parfaitement préservée ainsi que l'une des colonnes d'un porche d'entrée. L'intérieur consiste en une cour bordée anciennement de portiques. Au sud se situe la cella d'un temple entièrement disparu.

Église de Victoria
L'église de Victoria, qui se situe au nord-est du site, en contrebas du temple de Saturne, est le seul édifice chrétien révélé par les fouilles jusqu'à présent. À la fin du IVe siècle ou au début du Ve siècle, la communauté chrétienne installa dans un cimetière païen une petite église martyriale au plan irrégulier. À proximité se trouve le petit hypogée.

Infrastructures
Citernes et aqueduc
Le site de Dougga possède encore deux beaux ensembles de citernes, au nord et à l'ouest, dont l'un est particulièrement bien préservé. Un aqueduc menant à la cité, localisé à une très faible distance de celle-ci, compte parmi les monuments de ce type les mieux conservés de la Tunisie actuelle.
Les six citernes d'Aïn El Hammam, situées à proximité du temple de Junon Caelestis, peuvent contenir 6 000 m3 et sont particulièrement ruinées. Elles sont alimentées par une source située à 12 kilomètres et un aqueduc construit sous le règne de Commode et restauré dans le dernier quart du IVe siècle.
Ce lieu est encore utilisé une fois par an pour une manifestation populaire, la fête de Mokhola, une sainte dispensatrice de bienfaits parvenue ici en provenance du Maroc selon la tradition orale. La vénération s'accompagne de sacrifices d'animaux. Il a été démontré que cette tradition est païenne, la vénération se portant vers la source d'origine, appelée fons moccolitanus.
Le second ensemble, les citernes d'Aïn Mizeb, est en très bon état de conservation. Situés près du temple de Minerve, ses huit réservoirs voûtés peuvent contenir 9 000 m3 dont un bassin de décantation apposé. Ces réservoirs sont alimentés par une source située à 200 mètres et un aqueduc souterrain.
Un dernier ensemble de citernes secondaires se situe à proximité des thermes d'Aïn Doura, au sud-ouest du site.

Voies de circulation
Les voies de circulation de Dougga sont éloignées du modèle théorique — ordonnancé autour d'un cardo et d'un decumanus — du fait du plan original de la cité.
Le centre de la cité est vraisemblablement piétonnier et les voies s'apparentent davantage à des venelles riches en méandres. Des installations d'assainissement y sont présentes comme en témoignent les plaques d'égouts encore en place. Au bas de la colline se trouvent encore les traces des routes rejoignant la grande voie de Carthage à Théveste.

Découvertes effectuées sur le site
Le site de Dougga a livré de nombreuses œuvres dont beaucoup ont fait l'objet d'un prélèvement afin d'être déposées dans des musées, principalement au musée national du Bardo à Tunis.

Œuvres in situ
Peu d'œuvres sont restées en place à l'exception d'une sculpture de togatus sur la place de la Rose des vents et de quelques décors mosaïqués dont ceux de la maison dite de Vénus et surtout des thermes d'Aïn Doura. Cette situation tient à l'ancienneté des découvertes effectuées à une époque où les sites sont dépouillés après les fouilles de leurs œuvres et laissés à l'abandon. Cette procédure a permis de conserver avec leurs couleurs intactes un certain nombre de mosaïques, les autres mosaïques découvertes et non retirées ayant été dégradées par les intempéries.
Un projet de constitution d'un musée sur le site serait à l'étude, notamment afin d'accueillir les œuvres découvertes lors des fouilles récentes ou à découvrir.

Œuvres déposées au musée national du Bardo
Statuaire
Un certain nombre de têtes d'empereurs ont été retrouvées lors des fouilles. Parmi celles-ci, le portrait de Lucius Aurelius Verus a une place à part : il est représenté avec une ample coiffure, une barbe fournie et une vivacité dans le regard qui en fait l'une des œuvres majeures de la statuaire découverte à ce jour dans l'Afrique romaine. Cette œuvre africaine réalisée en marbre de Carrare possède encore des traces de polychromie dans les cheveux.
Le musée abrite également un togatus daté du IIIe siècle : il représente un homme d'un certain âge, à la barbe rase et vêtu d'une toge. Il s'agit sans doute d'une œuvre antérieure remise au goût du jour.

Mosaïques
La mosaïque des échansons datée du milieu du IIIe siècle figure une scène de beuverie : deux personnages servent à boire à deux autres, beaucoup plus petits, à partir d'une amphore posée sur leur épaule. Sur les deux amphores se trouvent inscrites des formules : PIE (« bois ! » en latin) et ZHCHC (« tu vivras » en grec). Sur les côtés se trouvent deux autres personnages apportant une autre amphore pour l'un, un branchage de laurier et un panier de roses pour l'autre.
Cette représentation est une forme de bienvenue pour les invités et une promesse d'un bon accueil. La même thématique se retrouve sur un médaillon de mosaïque également déposé au musée du Bardo et baptisé Omnia tibi Felicia (Puisses-tu te réjouir de tout).
La mosaïque de l'aurige vainqueur est plus tardive, de la seconde moitié du IVe siècle, et figure l'inscription Eros omnia per te (Eros tout grâce à toi). L'aurige est figuré de face, avec un grand souci de réalisme, ainsi que des chevaux dont deux sont nommés Amandus et Frunitus, du nom de leur caractère. Ils sont ordonnés de façon symétrique, cette dernière symétrie étant très prisée à cette époque. Le personnage tient un fouet, une couronne végétale et une palme. À l'arrière-plan se trouvent les grilles de départ du cirque.
Cette œuvre retrouvée dans une demeure privée semble devoir être interprétée comme une commémoration de jeux offerts par le propriétaire et en particulier d'une victoire d'un aurige dont le nom est Eros. La mosaïque d'Ulysse est un tableau inspiré de l'Odyssée : le héros grec apparaît debout sur un bateau à deux voiles et à un rang de rame, orné d'une tête humaine et d'une palme, les mains attachées au grand mât pour éviter de succomber au charme fatal de la musique des sirènes. Autour d'Ulysse sont assis ses compagnons, les oreilles bouchées de cire comme le relate la légende. Au pied d'un escarpement rocheux se tiennent trois sirènes représentées avec un buste de femme auquel s'attachent des ailes et des pattes d'oiseaux. L'une d'elles tient une double flûte, l'autre une lyre, la troisième dépourvue d'instrument est considérée comme la sirène chanteuse. Devant le bateau se trouve une petite barque dans laquelle se situe un pêcheur tenant une langouste au format exagéré. L'œuvre est datée des environs de 260-268 et a été découverte dans la « maison d'Ulysse et les pirates ».
La mosaïque de Neptune et les pirates provient du même péristyle que le pavement précédent. Le thème en est le châtiment des pirates de la mer Tyrrhénienne, mêlant la thématique dionysiaque à des thèmes marins plus fréquents. Le dieu se trouve debout, prêt à jeter sa lance, et se voit soutenu par une bacchante, un satyre et un vieux silène qui tient le gouvernail du navire. Une panthère se jette sur un membre du groupe de pirates qui sont transformés en dauphins lorsqu'ils reconnaissent la nature divine de leur adversaire. À gauche, de petits génies ont embarqué sur un autre navire, tandis que sur la droite est figurée une scène de pêche au poulpe, avec un filet.
Mohamed Yacoub accorde à ces deux scènes une fonction apotropaïque, un moyen de conjurer le sort, remontant vraisemblablement à un modèle hellénistique.
La mosaïque des cyclopes forgeant les foudres de Jupiter est issue du pavement d'un frigidarium illustrant trois cyclopes : Brontès, Stéropès et Pyracmon. Nus, ils forgent les foudres de Jupiter que Vulcain, assis en face d'eux, maintient sur l'enclume. Cette dernière représentation a disparu. La mosaïque date de la fin du IIIe siècle et a été découverte dans les thermes des Cyclopes.

Œuvres déposées dans d'autres musées
L'inscription bilingue du mausolée libyco-punique déposée par le consul Read se trouve toujours au British Museum. Aucune restitution n'a été tentée sur le monument visible sur le site. L'inscription présente le même texte dans les langues punique et libyque.

Redécouverte et avenir du site
La cité a semblé connaître un déclin précoce, comme en témoigne la relative pauvreté des vestiges de l'époque chrétienne. L'époque byzantine voit la zone du forum transformée en fortin et de nombreux édifices importants détruits afin de fournir des matériaux nécessaires à la construction. Cependant, le site n'a jamais été totalement abandonné et il subsiste longtemps un village peuplé par les descendants des anciens habitants, comme en témoigne encore une petite mosquée installée à l'emplacement du temple de la Piété Auguste, ainsi que de petits thermes d'époque aghlabide sur la bordure sud du forum.
Les premiers visiteurs occidentaux ayant laissé des témoignages sur les vestiges parcourent le site dès le XVIIe siècle. Cette tendance se poursuit au XVIIIe et au début du XIXe siècle. Les monuments les mieux conservés, dont le mausolée libyco-punique, ont fait l'objet de descriptions et, à la fin de la période, d'études architecturales.

La mise en place du protectorat en 1881 voit la Tunisie se doter d'un service des antiquités, dirigé par Paul Gauckler de 1896 à 1905, qui fait du dégagement du site de Dougga une priorité dès 1901, en parallèle avec les travaux effectués à Carthage. Les travaux, initiés par Gauckler et conduits par Louis Poinssot (inspecteur des antiquités à partir de 1907 puis directeur des antiquités de 1921 à 1942), se concentrent sur la zone du forum, puis d'autres découvertes jalonnent les campagnes de fouilles, à peu près continues jusqu'en 1939. Parallèlement à ces fouilles, des travaux de restauration sont effectués au Capitole, dont ne subsistent que la façade et le mur du fond de la cella, et surtout au mausolée libyco-punique entre 1908 et 1910.

Après l'indépendance, d'autres bâtiments sont dégagés au début des années 1960, comme le temple de la Victoire germanique de Caracalla. Dans le même temps, les derniers habitants sont chassés du site et réinstallés dans un village localisé dans la plaine, à quelques kilomètres du site antique, qui porte le nom de Nouvelle Dougga. En 1991, la décision est prise de faire du site un parc archéologique national. Un programme scientifique de coopération œuvre en particulier pour la connaissance de l'épigraphie et celle des temples païens. En 1997, le site est inscrit sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco. Le site, un peu à l'écart des circuits touristiques, reste assez peu visité malgré son importance et un état de conservation tout à fait exceptionnel. Pour le rendre plus attractif, la constitution d'un musée sur place est à l'ordre du jour et un site web a été mis en ligne par l'Institut national du patrimoine pour présenter le site et sa région.
À l'heure actuelle, les visiteurs disposant de suffisamment de temps peuvent apprécier Dougga, non seulement pour ses vestiges, mais également pour l'environnement des oliveraies qui lui confèrent une ambiance unique.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
Français
: document utilisé comme source pour la rédaction de cet article.

Ouvrages généraux
Aïcha Ben Abed-Ben Khedher, Le musée du Bardo, Tunis, Cérès, 1992, 76 p. (ISBN 978-9-973-70083-4).
Claude Briand-Ponsart et Christophe Hugoniot, L'Afrique romaine, de l'Atlantique à la Tripolitaine : 146 av. J.-C. - 533 apr. J.-C., Paris, Armand Colin, 2005, 576 p. (ISBN 978-2-200-26838-1).
Gabriel Camps, Les Berbères, mémoire et identité, Paris/Montréal, Actes Sud/Leméac, coll. « Babel », 2007, 350 p. (ISBN 978-2-742-76922-3). .
Michel Christol, Regards sur l'Afrique romaine, Paris, Errance, 2005, 303 p. (ISBN 2-87772-313-5). .
Paul Corbier et Marc Griesheimer, L'Afrique romaine : 146 av. J.-C. - 439 apr. J.-C., Paris, Ellipses, 2005, 432 p. (ISBN 978-2-7-298-2441-9).
Mohand Akli Haddadou, Dictionnaire toponymique et historique de l'Algérie : comportant les principales localités, ainsi qu'un glossaire des mots arabes et berbères entrant dans la composition des noms de lieux, Tizi Ouzou, Achab, 2012, 636 p. (ISBN 978-9947-9-7225-0, présentation en ligne). .
Jacques Gascou, La politique municipale de l'Empire romain en Afrique proconsulaire de Trajan à Septime Sévère, Rome, Collection de l'École française de Rome, 1972, 262 p. (lire en ligne). .
Jean-Claude Golvin, L'Antiquité retrouvée, Paris, Errance, 2003, 191 p. (ISBN 978-2-877-72266-7). .
Pierre Gros, L'architecture romaine du début du IIIe siècle av. J.-C. à la fin du Haut-Empire, t. 1 : Monuments publics, Paris, Picard, 1996, 503 p. (ISBN 2708405004). .
Pierre Gros, L'architecture romaine du début du IIIe siècle av. J.-C. à la fin du Haut-Empire, t. 2 : Maisons, palais, villas et tombeaux, Paris, Picard, coll. « Les manuels d'art et d'archéologie antique », 2001, 527 p. (ISBN 2708405330). .
Christophe Hugoniot, Rome en Afrique : de la chute de Carthage aux débuts de la conquête arabe, Paris, Flammarion, 2000, 350 p. (ISBN 978-2-0-808-3003-6).
Yann Le Bohec, Histoire de l'Afrique romaine, Paris, Picard, 2005, 282 p. (ISBN 2708407511).
Edward Lipinski (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation phénicienne et punique, Turnhout, Brepols, 1992, 502 p. (ISBN 978-0-785-97902-9).
Ammar Mahjoubi, Villes et structures de la province romaine d'Afrique, Tunis, Centre de publication universitaire, 2000, 271 p. (ISBN 9973937953).
Guillemette Mansour, Tunisie : musée à ciel ouvert, Tunis, Dad, 2007 (ISBN 9973512138).
Hédi Slim et Nicolas Fauqué, La Tunisie antique : de Hannibal à saint Augustin, Paris, Mengès, 2001, 259 p. (ISBN 978-2-856-20421-4). .
Yvon Thébert, Thermes romains d'Afrique du Nord et leur contexte méditerranéen : études d'histoire et d'archéologie, Rome, École française de Rome, 2003, 733 p. (ISBN 2-7283-0398-3). .
Mohamed Yacoub, Splendeurs des mosaïques de Tunisie, Tunis, Agence nationale du patrimoine, 1995, 421 p. (ISBN 9973-917-23-5). .
Collectif, L'Afrique romaine : 69-439, Neuilly-sur-Seine, Atlande, 2006, 383 p. (ISBN 978-2-350-30002-3). .
Collectif, La Tunisie, carrefour du monde antique, Dijon, Faton, coll. « Les dossiers d'archéologie » (no 200), 1994, 135 p. (ISBN 978-2-87844-020-1). .

Ouvrages consacrés au site
Habib Baklouti, « L'alimentation en eau de Dougga (Thugga) », Africa, vol. XXII,‎ 2008, p. 139–176.
Gabriel Camps, « Dougga », dans Gabriel Camps (dir.), Encyclopédie berbère, vol. 16 : Djalut – Dougga, Aix-en-Provence, Édisud, 1995 (ISBN 2-85744-828-7, lire en ligne), p. 2930-2933 .
Paul Gauckler, Le pays de Dougga : Dr Carton, découvertes archéologiques et épigraphiques, Tunis, Imprimerie rapide, 1895, 14 p.
Paul Gauckler, Rapport épigraphique sur les fouilles de Dougga en 1904, Paris, Imprimerie nationale, 1906.
Jean-Claude Golvin et Mustapha Khanoussi, Dougga, études d'architecture religieuse : les sanctuaires des Victoires de Caracalla, de « Pluton » et de Caelestis, Bordeaux, Ausonius, 2005, 214 p. (ISBN 978-2-910-02352-2). .
Mustapha Khanoussi, « L'évolution urbaine de Thugga (Dougga) en Afrique proconsulaire : de l'agglomération numide à la ville africo-romaine », CRAI, vol. 147, no 1,‎ 2003, p. 131–155 (lire en ligne). .
Mustapha Khanoussi, Dougga, Tunis, Agence de mise en valeur du patrimoine et de promotion culturelle, 2008 (ISBN 978-9-973-95433-6). .
Mustapha Khanoussi et Louis Maurin, Dougga (Thugga) : études épigraphiques, Bordeaux, Ausonius, 1997, 277 p. (ISBN 2-910023-06-0).
Mustapha Khanoussi et Louis Maurin, Dougga, fragments d'histoire : choix d'inscriptions latines éditées, traduites et commentées (Ier – IVe siècles), Bordeaux, Ausonius, 2000, 348 p. (ISBN 978-2-910-02317-1).
Mustapha Khanoussi et Louis Maurin (dir.), Mourir à Dougga : recueil des inscriptions funéraires, Bordeaux, Ausonius, 2002, 734 p. (ISBN 978-2-910-02332-4). .
Alfred Merlin et Louis Poinssot, « Amours vendangeurs au gecko (mosaïque de Thugga) », Revue africaine, nos 446-449,‎ 1956.
Claude Poinssot, Les ruines de Dougga, Tunis, Institut national d'archéologie, 1956 (réimpr. 1983).
Claude Poinssot, « Aqva Commodiana Avreliae Thvggae », dans Mélanges d'archéologie, d'épigraphie et d'histoire offerts à Jérome Carcopino, Paris, Hachette, 1956.
Louis Poinssot, Les fouilles de Dougga en avril-mai 1903, Paris, Imprimerie nationale, 1904.
Louis Poinssot, Nouvelles inscriptions de Dougga, Paris, Imprimerie nationale, 1909 (réimpr. 1910).
Louis Poinssot, Inscriptions de Thugga découvertes en 1910-1913, Paris, Imprimerie nationale, 1913.
Sophie Saint-Amans, Topographie religieuse de Thugga (Dougga) : ville romaine d'Afrique proconsulaire (Tunisie), Bordeaux, Ausonius, 2004, 432 p. (ISBN 978-2-356-13292-5). .
Collectif, Il était une fois, Dougga... Tukka... ou... Thugga la Romaine, Tunis, Alyssa, 1993, 68 p.

Autres langues
(de) Mustapha Khanoussi et Volker Michael Strocka, THVGGA I : Grundlagen und Berichte, Mayence, Philipp von Zabern, 2002 (ISBN 3805328923).
(en) Mustapha Khanoussi, Stefan Ritter et Philipp von Rummel, « The German-Tunisian project at Dougga. First results of the excavations south of the Maison du Trifolium », Antiquités africaines, vol. 40,‎ 2004-2005, p. 43-66 (ISSN 0066-4871).
(de + fr) Rainer Stutz, THVGGA II : Drei Hanghäuser in Thugga. Maison des trois masques, maison du labyrinthe, maison de Dionysos et d'Ulysse, Mayence, Philipp von Zabern, 2007 (ISBN 3805337582).
(de) Mustapha Khanoussi, Stefan Ritter et Philipp von Rummel, THVGGA III : Archäologische Untersuchungen zur Siedlungsgeschichte von Thugga. Die Ausgrabungen südlich der Maison du Trifolium 2001 bis 2003, Wiesbaden, Reichert, 2016 (ISBN 978-3-954-90031-2).

Voir aussi
Articles connexes
Royaume de Numidie
Massinissa
Civilisation carthaginoise
Histoire de Carthage
Afrique romaine
Fossa regia

Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste du patrimoine mondial 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

« Dougga », sur dougga.rnrt.tn (consulté le 12 avril 2020).
(de) « Das Thugga Projekt », sur archaeologie-alt.uni-freiburg.de (consulté le 12 avril 2020).
« Dougga », sur inp2020.tn (consulté le 14 mai 2020).

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Rome antique   Portail des Phéniciens et de la civilisation carthaginoise   Portail des Berbères   Portail du patrimoine mondial


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 1,272
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Dougga
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Dougga is a small town in the north of Tunisia that holds the extensive ruins of a Roman town, set on a hilltop, overlooking surrounding valleys with olive plantations, featured on the UNESCO World Heritage list. It also has several other monuments dating from pre-Roman times. Plan to spend about 2 hours here, and if you have a car, couple it with trips to surrounding areas (ask the security guard at the ticket office for recommendations).

## Understand
The road to Dougga passes through beautiful rural and scenic landscape. Unlike Roman ruins in Carthage or even in European towns where one or two remaining monuments are isolated in the middle of a modern city, at Dougga, the entire town is preserved, even the Roman streets. Without the barriers and the flocks of tourists, one can take one's time to climb in and out of houses and tunnels, temples and the theatres.
As with other sites in Tunis, Dougga's history is not limited to only the Roman period. One finds an old Punic temple here with a cleansing bath and walls from the Phoenician period, which was later transformed and reused by the Romans, and thus has Roman pillars. There is also an obvious funerary monument, the Mausoleum of Ateban, dating to 2nd century BCE, one of three examples of royal Numidian architecture. Its inscription is housed in the British Museum, and the Punic-Libyan bilingual inscription was used to translate Libyan script.

## Get in
Get a bus (at least two hours) or louage (80 minutes) to Teboursouk (pronounced Tebsook) from Bab Saadoune louage/bus station (Gare de Routiere Nord) in Tunis. A taxi will take you the short distance to Dougga and then pick you up again at an arranged time. Louage drivers often ring ahead to alert the taxi that a tourist is arriving. It's very convenient and quick but 15-20 DT for only a short distance. If you can't manage to get the price down, remember that Dougga is a memorable place to visit and well worth the money. As of July 2016, there was only one, extremely busy, taxi in Teboursouk that also served as the local bus, so arguing with the driver over the price was pointless.
Get a bus (at least two hours) or louage (1 hour) to Teboursouk from the louage station in El Kef. The same applies.
Use return taxi trip to get to Teboursouk because there will almost certainly be no taxis waiting to pick up passengers leaving Dougga (as it is in the middle of nowhere).
If you return after 2:00PM, all the buses/louage in Teboursouk might be full. You can take a cab down to Espace BICHA in Nouvelle Dougga. As buses between Tunis and El Kef stop there, you can hop on one which has empty seats. The owner can call drivers to make sure that you will fit.
If driving, clear sign posts pointing to the Ruins of Dougga can be followed from Tebersouk.
You could also go as part of an organised tour from Tunis.

## Get around
Light sandals might not be the best footwear as the paths are, for the most part, cobbled and can be  reasonably steep in places.

## See
There are lots of buildings still partially standing. There are also few restrictions as to where you can walk. The following is a suggested route to visit.
Entry is 7 DT plus 1 DT for photography (as of 2018). As for other archeological sites in Tunisia, expect little explanations on site.
36.423799.22031 Theater. Built in 168 or 169 CE, is one of the best preserved examples in Roman Africa. It could seat 3500 spectators, and is the first thing one sees on entering the site. From here continue on to the capitol, which has great monolithic columns that cannot be missed.
Roads.. On the main roads (the broad road to Carthage for example), one can see cut outs for horses not to slip, and holes in the remaining door ways to tie the horses to. Under the roads are the Roman sewers various stones on the main road can be lifted up to let the water out in times of flooding.Access to sewers
Mosque.. Tiny building with Roman columns in the interior to the left of the capitol when coming from the theatre.
Marketplace.. Note the marks in the floor where the shop doors used to go.
Square of the Rose of the Winds.. Look out for the markings on the floor with the 12 winds especially the winds bringing rain from the north.
The Capitol.. A Roman temple from the 2nd century CE, principally dedicated to Rome's protective triad: Jupiter Optimus Maximus, Juno Regina et Minerva Augusta. Located next to the marketplace and the forum.
Forum.. Note the statue with the images of four gods on two sides.
The arch of Alexander Septimius.. Can be seen from far as it is well preserved. On the road towards Theveste, in Algeria (300km).
The temple of Caelaestis.. A little way off, through a grove of olive trees, and there is a sign pointing the way. It is dedicated to Juno Caelestis, the successor of the Punic god Tanit. Its well-preserved temenos is demarcated by a Phoenician wall, a large section of which has been very well preserved. The interior has Roman columns. On the right side is a small pit used for purification in Punic times. Temple of Caelaestis
Dar Lacheb.. Back on the main road to Carthage is a sanctuary, a temple, a gymnasium? A perfectly preserved door in any case! Two stretches of grass on the inside of this area.Dar Lachheb's door
Antonian Baths.. Three rooms for hot, warm and cold baths. In the center of the city area and was used in winter. Two other baths exist, one outside the city center for the summer. Pass through the tunnels where the slaves used to heat the water to get to the three baths. From the room for rest with the metal grids on the floor and the mosaics, climb up the steep steps to get back to the Capitol.View of the Capitol from Antonian baths
Brothel.. Facing the valley, somewhat halfway between Dar Lacheb and the Mausoleum of Ateban, is the brothel many small chambers around a main court. You can get to it by passing through the smaller theatre that is just below the area towards the valley, upon exiting the steps.
Mausoleum of Ateban..
Septimius Severus's arch.. From the brothel, continue back towards the main exit and you'll reach the arch of Septimius Severus two stumps left, but majestic. On the road that leads towards Carthage (120km).Septimius Severus's arch

## Do
Take lots of photographs, wander amongst the olive groves, sit and take in the majesty of the place.

## Buy
No facilities on site. Don't be surprised if a local farmer/shepherd tries to sell you Roman 'artifacts'.

## Eat
Small shady area with tables where you can buy cold drinks, snacks, postcards and use the toilets.
There is also a restaurant just below the south entrance that offers a single option: a prix-fixe meal (91d meal for 2, Feb. 2019) of soup, salad, and couscous. Expensive by local standards but tasty and a nice environment. The meal takes approximately an hour.

## Drink
Make sure you have a supply of water but you can buy it - and other drinks - on site. If buying from the local town make sure you get it from a reputable shop - street vendors have been known to refill empty bottled water containers with the local tap variety.

## Go next
Tunis



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
BULLA REGIA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:54:34


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,140
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bulla_Regia
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bulla Regia was a Berber, Punic, and Roman town near present-day Jendouba, Tunisia. Its surviving ruins and archaeological site are noted for their Hadrianic-era semi-subterranean housing, a protection from the fierce heat and effects of the sun. Many of the mosaic floors have been left in place; others may be seen at the Bardo Museum in Tunis. There is also a small museum connected with the site.

Names
The Punic name of the town appears on its currency as BBʿL (𐤁𐤁𐤏𐤋‬). This has been suggested to have been a contraction of BT BʿL (𐤁𐤕 𐤁𐤏𐤋‬), meaning "House" or "Temple of Baal".
The name Bulla Regia is Latin for "Royal Bulla". The epithet refers to its status as the Numidian capital under Masinissa. It was notionally refounded at the time of its elevation to colony status and formally named Colonia Aelia Hadriana Augusta Bulla Regia after its imperial sponsor Hadrian.

History
Berber town
A Berber settlement probably predated the Punic one. Imported Greek ceramics dating to the 4th century BC have been found.

Punic town
Carthage gained control over the town during the 3rd century BC, when inscriptions reveal that the inhabitants venerated Baal Hammon and buried their dead in urns in the Punic style. A capital from a temple of Tanit is preserved at the site's museum.

Numidian capital
Bulla Regia was part of the territory won for Rome by Scipio Africanus in 203 BC during the Second Punic War. The Numidian king Masinissa "recovered the lands of his ancestors" (as noted in an inscription) and made Bulla his capital in 156 BC. One of his sons maintained a palace in the city. Under the Numidians, a regularized orthogonal grid street plan was imposed in the hellenistic manner on at least part of the earlier irregular system.

Roman colony
The Romans assumed direct control in 46 BC, when Julius Caesar organized the province of Africa and rewarded the (perhaps simply neutral) conduct of Bulla during the recent civil war by making it a free city (Latin: civitas libera). Under Hadrian, it was raised to the status of a Roman colony and its citizens given full citizenship.

Destruction
Bulla Regia slowly lost importance under Byzantine rule. As elsewhere in the late empire, the local aristocracy found themselves in a position to increase the extent of their houses at the expense of public space: the House of the Fisherman was adapted to link two separate insulae, turning a thoroughfare into a dead end. An earthquake destroyed Bulla Regia, collapsing its first floors into the subterranean floors.

Re-discovery
Drifting sand protected the abandoned sites, which were forgotten until the first excavations were begun in 1906, in part spurred by the destruction of the monumental entrance to the Roman city.
The forum, surrounded by porticoes, was excavated 1949–52. Its public basilica had an apse at each end. As a cathedral, it had a highly unusual cruciform baptismal font inserted in the center of the rear (west end) of its nave. Its small amphitheater, the subject of a reproach in a sermon of Augustine of Hippo, retains the crispness of its edges and steps because it lay buried until 1960–61.

Museum and archeological site
Bulla Regia is now an archeological site. There is a museum, and underground tours are available. Restoration work aims to protect the buildings, which are well-preserved due to being largely built underground. Most of the elaborate polychrome mosaics are being conserved in-situ, allowing visitors to see them in their original architectural context. The Roman drainage system has been restored to keep the houses from flooding.

Buildings
In the unique domus architecture developed in the city, a ground-level storey, open to the warming winter sun, stood above a subterranean level, built round a two-story atrium. Open-bottomed terracotta bottle-shapes were built into vaulting. Water sprinkled on the floors brought the colors of the mosaics to life while they provided cooling by evaporation.
In the House of the Hunt, the basilica, with an apse at its head, a transept and dependent spaces opening into what would be the nave if it were a church, has been instanced (Thébert) as an example of the conjunction between public architecture and the domus of the ruling class in the fourth century, spaces soon to be Christianized as churches and cathedrals.
The subtle colors and shading and the modelling of three-dimensional forms of the finest mosaics at Bulla Regia are not surpassed by any in North Africa, where the Roman art of mosaic floors reached its fullest development. The mosaic of a haloed Amphitrite (House of Amphitrite) is often illustrated (see image above).
A temple complex at Bulla Regia dates to the time of Emperor Septimius Severus and features intricate mosaic floors, opus sectile decorations, and paintings. An inscription confirms that the emperor and his sons, Geta and Caracalla, were venerated at the site.
A Temple of Apollo has also been identified at the site. In its courtyard, abandonment deposits over the paved surface yielded the remains of a woman who had worn a slave collar made out of lead. The tag states that the wearer had fled from Bulla Regia and instructs the finder to detain her; it includes the words "Adultera meretrix," taken by scholars either as a slave name or as an insulting descriptor (which scholar Jennifer Trimble notes would amount to something like "a slutty prostitute").

Religion
Bulla Regia was important enough to become a bishopric, suffragan of Carthage, which transformed the civil basilica into its cathedral. Bulla Regia  was the seat of an ancient bishopric bearing its name. The bishopric was founded during the Roman Empire and survived through the Arian Vandal Kingdom and Orthodox Byzantine Empire, only declined with the city and the arrival of Islam.
The diocese was refounded in the 20th century as Bullensium Regiorum, a titular see of the Roman Catholic Church. Its bishops have included:

Jules Girard (8 July 1921 – 23 March 1950)
Herbert Bednorz (4 May 1950 – 12 November 1967)
Titular Archbishop Pierre Martin Ngô Đình Thục (17 February 1968 – 13 December 1984), retired Metropolitan Archbishop of Huê
Adam Marcinkowski (23 February 1985 on), Auxiliary Bishop of Płock

References
Citations
Bibliography
García Moreno, Luis A. (2001), De Gerión a César, Memorias del Seminario de Historia Antigua, Vol. IX, Alcala: University of Alcala Press. (in Spanish)
Head, Barclay; et al. (1911), "Numidia", Historia Numorum (2nd ed.), Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 884–887.
Sola-Solé, Josep María (1980), El Alfabeto Monetario de las Cecas "Libio-Fenices", Biblioteca Universitaria, Vol. I, Puvill. (in Spanish)

Further reading
The excavations at Bulla Regia were published as Les ruines de Bulla Regia, A. Besaouch, R. Hanoune, and Y. Thébert, Rome, 1977.

External links

World Monuments Fund website about Bulla Regia
Website about Bulla Regia
Website about Bulla Regia Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine
Virtual tourist site
GigaCatholic with titular incumbent biography links


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 163
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A8%D9%88%D9%84%D8%A7_%D8%B1%D9%8A%D8%AC%D9%8A%D8%A7
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

بلاريجيا أو بولا ريجيا (من اللاتينية: Bulla Regia، أي «بولا المَلَكِيّة»، سميت الملكية لأنها كانت عاصمة الملك النوميدي ماسينيسا). هو موقع أثري ومدينة تاريخية تقع قرب مدينة جندوبة شمال غرب البلاد التونسية.

التاريخ
ترجع جذور بولا ريجيا إلى القرن الرابع قبل الميلاد إلا أنها لم تصبح ذات أهمية إلا بعد سيطرة القرطاجيين عليها. خضعت المدينة عام 203 ق.م للرومان قبل أن تصبح عام 156 ق.م عاصمة للملك النوميدي ماسينيسا، حليف روما. شهدت المدينة حالة من الركود أثناء العهد البيزنطي ليهجرها سكانها شيئا فشيئا وتختفي معالم الحياة فيها بداية من الألفية الثانية. ابتداء من منتصف القرن التاسع عشر أقيمت أول الحفريات فيها وتم الكشف عن عدة معالم وآثار طوال القرن العشرين. يحتوي الموقع حاليا على عدة معالم (فوروم، مسرح أثري، حمامات) أغلبها يرجع إلى العهد الروماني. يضم الموقع أيضا متحفا يعرض لوحات فسيفساء وتوابيت إضافة لعدة آثار تعود إلى العهد القرطاجي، النوميدي أو الروماني.

مقالات ذات صلة
متحف بولا ريجيا

مراجع
وصلات خارجية
مقال عن بولا ريجيا في موقع المعهد الوطني للتراث تونس (بالفرنسية).


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 5,977
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bulla_Regia
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bulla Regia (arabe : بولاريجيا) est un site archéologique situé dans le gouvernorat de Jendouba, au Nord-Ouest de la Tunisie, plus précisément au lieu-dit anciennement dénommé Hammam-Derradji — ce toponyme fixé par l'archéologue, diplomate et membre de l'Institut de France, Charles-Joseph Tissot, n'étant plus usité depuis Gilbert Charles-Picard — à cinq kilomètres au nord de Jendouba.
Autrefois placé sur la route reliant Carthage à Hippone (actuelle Annaba), le site a fait l'objet de recherches archéologiques partielles, qui ont cependant permis de mettre en évidence l'ancienneté de l'occupation et de mettre au jour un élément caractéristique de l'architecture domestique à l'époque romaine : la construction d'un étage souterrain reprenant le plan des maisons, particularité posant un problème en raison de l'absence d'utilisation de plans similaires dans d'autres régions chaudes de l'Empire romain.

Localisation et géologie
Le site se trouve dans la moyenne vallée de l'actuelle Medjerda (ancienne Bagradas) — les Grandes Plaines des auteurs anciens — au pied du Djebel R'bia qui s'élève à 649 mètres et au milieu d'un riche terroir céréalier qui a suscité la création précoce d'une cité.
Sa position au carrefour d'un axe est-ouest, reliant Hippone à Carthage, et nord-sud, reliant le Sahel à la mer à travers la Kroumirie, a été mise en évidence par Yvon Thébert. De même, la proximité du site de Chemtou et de ses riches carrières de marbre numide a pu contribuer de manière substantielle à l'enrichissement de la cité : elle a pu bénéficier de l'infrastructure construite pour l'exportation du marbre aux fins d'exporter sa production céréalière, au moins en partie.

Histoire ancienne du site
Cité aux origines anciennes
Les origines berbères de Bulla Regia sont probablement antérieures à sa culture punique. De nombreux témoignages d'une occupation très ancienne parsèment le site : nécropole mégalithique située au sud du parc archéologique actuel et particulièrement bien conservée, tombes à puits et stèles néo-puniques. En outre, de la céramique grecque que l'on peut dater du IVe siècle av. J.-C. y a été retrouvée.
Au IIIe siècle av. J.-C., la ville est sous l'influence de Carthage car des inscriptions révèlent la présence d'un culte offert au dieu Ba'al Hammon et l'inhumation des morts dans des vases funéraires de type punique. Le musée local conserve d'ailleurs des éléments d'un temple dédié à Tanit. Un trésor monétaire de frappes de Carthage en électrum et argent daté des environs de 230 av. J.-C. a aussi été découvert dans les fouilles de la « Maison de la chasse ».

Les fouilles font apparaître une intégration de la cité à cette époque au commerce méditerranéen, de par la diversité géographique des découvertes effectuées.

Cité numide
La cité fait ensuite vraisemblablement partie du territoire investi par les troupes romaines en 203 av. J.-C., à l'issue de la deuxième guerre punique.
Elle devient en 156 av. J.-C. la capitale du royaume numide de Massinissa qui reste un royaume client de Rome mais récupère les « terres de ses ancêtres » (selon une inscription). La ville reçoit dès lors son épithète de « royal » (Regia). Les villes numides royales sont alors des capitales secondaires ou des éléments du domaine roya, au rôle à la fois économique et politique.
À cette époque, les rues sont organisées selon un plan orthogonal de type hellénistique qui remplace en partie l'ancien plan des ruelles et des insulae. La ville numide, adaptée au relief, s'étend sur environ trente hectares ; elle est protégée par une muraille de gros appareil dont il reste des vestiges.
C'est sans doute à Bulla Regia que Pompée met à mort le fils de Massinissa, Hiarbas, en 81 av. J.-C..

Cité africaine qui se romanise
Après la bataille de Thapsus, les Romains reprennent le contrôle direct de la ville en 46 av. J.-C., à l'occasion de l'organisation de la province d'Afrique par Jules César qui récompense la conduite (sans doute neutre) de Bulla Regia dans les guerres civiles qui font rage à Rome. Il lui accorde alors le statut de ville libre. À ce titre, la cité conserve son territoire et son organisation politique traditionnelle. Des cités situées à proximité (Simitthus et Thuburnica) voient quant à elles s'installer sur leur sol des colonies de vétérans.
Au sein de la province d'Afrique, la ville voit son intégration à la romanité par le biais de divers éléments que les chercheurs ont pu mettre en évidence : la langue latine se répand peu à peu, l'onomastique voit les habitants adopter les tria nomina typiques et les institutions politiques locales se calquent peu à peu sur celles d'Italie.
La cité obtient le statut de municipe assorti du droit latin sous les Flaviens — sans doute à l'initiative de Vespasien — mais sans obtenir la citoyenneté romaine pour ses habitants alors que c'était la règle jusque-là. Cette nouveauté contribue à l'intégration des cités pérégrines à la romanisation. Le cens nécessaire pour accéder aux magistratures locales se monte alors autour de 4 000 ou 5 000 sesterces. Sous le règne de l'empereur Hadrien, elle devient une colonie honoraire sous le nom de Colonia Aelia Hadriana Augusta Bulla Regia, donnant à ses habitants la pleine citoyenneté romaine  et se dotant d'institutions politiques locales imitant celles de Rome. La ville exerce alors un rayonnement certain sur sa région.
Symboles de l'intégration à la romanité, deux familles de Bulla Regia, les Marcii et les Aradii, après s'être enrichis dans le commerce du blé et de l'huile, intègrent le Sénat au début du IIIe siècle. Cette intégration n'est pas le fait d'une population restée sans doute d'effectif modeste — quelques milliers d'habitants tout au plus — mais est liée à la fertilité du terroir. Les édifications, tant domestiques que collectives, nées de l'évergétisme de l'élite locale, signent l'évidente prospérité des lieux.
Dans la période d'émergence du christianisme, la cité se dote dès 256 d'un évêque, marque de la richesse de ses habitants et de son terroir. Augustin d'Hippone considère la cité comme totalement christianisée dès 399.

Effacement progressif à l'époque vandale et byzantine
La cité est représentée à la conférence de Carthage — ouverte le 1er juin 411 — qui condamne le schisme donatiste. Augustin d'Hippone accuse, à cette occasion, les schismatiques d'avoir coupé les liens entre l'Église catholique africaine et les Églises orientales originelles.
Par la suite, la persécution arienne de l'époque vandale entraîne à Bulla Regia un épisode tragique, le massacre de catholiques dans la basilique. La cité décline lentement sous la domination de l'Empire byzantin. À cette époque, comme ailleurs à la fin de l'empire, l'aristocratie locale se trouve en mesure d'augmenter la taille de ses maisons aux dépens de l'espace public : la « chambre du pêcheur » est ainsi adaptée pour relier deux insulae séparées et transforme une voie de communication en impasse. Dans la « Maison du trésor » a été découverte une cruche contenant des monnaies byzantines du VIIe siècle.
Néanmoins, des fragments de céramique émaillée aghlabide et fatimide des IXe et Xe siècles, découverts lors des fouilles des thermes, portent à croire à une continuité de l'occupation du site à une époque tardive.
Une telle découverte contredit l'hypothèse d'une rupture violente entre l'Antiquité et le Moyen Âge arabo-musulman, Yvon Thébert parlant à ce propos d'un « effacement progressif ».

Éléments du site
Plan général de la ville
Les bâtiments les plus importants découverts lors des recherches archéologiques du début du XXe siècle mis à part, le plan de l'ancienne cité est assez mal connu. En effet, une partie importante de la ville reste non fouillée à ce jour, les recherches n'ayant présenté un caractère méthodique que lors de la période récente, plus particulièrement dans la deuxième moitié du XXe siècle.
Si la ville punique est totalement inconnue, la ville numide à plan orthogonal sur modèle grec a pu être reconnue.
Le processus de romanisation a vu la ville se parer de monuments importants entre le IIe et le IVe siècle, accompagnant de ce fait la prospérité de la province. En dépit de la connaissance d'un certain nombre d'éléments de sa parure monumentale, l'urbanisme de la cité romaine est indéterminé et les fouilles restent trop partielles pour se faire la moindre idée d'ensemble. Les archéologues ont cependant pu énoncer comme principe une adaptation au relief plus que l'application stricte d'un schéma urbanistique préétabli. De même, il a fallu prendre en compte l'existence de l'ancienne cité pour l'implantation de ses monuments, son plan ne pouvant de ce fait pas être comparé à des fondations coloniales ex nihilo.

Architecture privée
Bulla Regia est connue pour ses habitations, dont une vingtaine a fait l'objet d'un dégagement, datées à partir du règne de l'empereur romain Hadrien même si l'aménagement le plus spécifique semble daté des IIIe-IVe siècle. Elles offrent la particularité d'être pourvues d'un étage souterrain, reproduction de moindre ampleur de l'étage supérieur qui est de plain-pied avec la rue. Cette solution d'étage enterré est un choix lié, mais pas seulement, à un faible relief.

Les cuisines, qui nécessitent un espace aéré, ne se trouvent que dans la partie supérieure. Les habitants trouvent ici une protection contre la chaleur et le soleil et sans doute aussi le moyen d'accroître la surface habitée. Cette architecture domestique offre trois plans-types pour ces étages en sous-sol.

Premier type : la « Maison de la chasse »
Dans les plus riches demeures, comme la « Maison de la chasse », les pièces sont distribuées sur deux côtés d'un petit péristyle carré qui est la source centrale d'aération et de lumière, des ouvertures secondaires accentuant cet effet. Il n'y a en effet pas d'atrium dans les maisons d'Afrique romaine mais plutôt une véritable cour à ciel ouvert comme dans les maisons des médinas arabes ou dans certaines habitations puniques. La « Maison de la pêche », du nom de la principale thématique iconographique du décor mosaïqué, est bâtie selon le même type.

La « Maison de la chasse » possède un péristyle, mesurant 19 mètres sur 13, orné de colonnes à chapiteaux corinthiens. En outre, l'étage inférieur possède un dédoublement du triclinium du rez-de-chaussée. La technique mise en œuvre, en particulier dans les voûtes souterraines, est remarquablement bien conservée. La « Maison de la chasse » constitue l'unique exemple local où l'histoire de l'occupation du site a pu être retracée grâce à des fouilles exhaustives, de l'époque hellénistique à l'époque byzantine, avec implantation d'installations diverses dont des thermes privatifs au IVe siècle.
En outre, on y distingue une basilique privée datée de la première moitié du IVe siècle et disposant d'une abside, d'un transept et d'espaces dépendants qui auraient été une nef s'il s'était agi d'une église.
Ceci aurait pu être un exemple de fusion entre architecture publique et domestique initiée par la classe régnante du IVe siècle av. J.-C., espaces bientôt christianisés car adoptés comme plan des églises et des cathédrales. Selon Yvon Thébert, l'élaboration du plan à transept répond d'abord à des problèmes de circulation, problèmes qui se posent tout autant pour la parade profane d'un aristocrate que pour des pratiques cérémonielles, comme le résume le médiéviste Patrick Boucheron : « les chrétiens n'élaborent pas le plan basilical associant une nef et un transept, ils le chargent d'une signification nouvelle ».
Thébert rappelle l'ancienneté de certains éléments de ce répertoire architectural, comme l'abside, le christianisme, triomphant selon lui, « recompose de vieilles formules [...] et cette recomposition [...] est le fait de toute l'architecture tardo-antique » .

Second type : la Maison dite d'Amphitrite et la Maison du trésor
La « Maison d'Amphitrite » illustre le deuxième plan-type : l'escalier d'accès débouche sur un long vestibule qui dessert des pièces ouvertes perpendiculairement, souvent au nombre de trois. Certaines pièces ouvrent, par de larges fenêtres, sur une grande et profonde prise d'air et de lumière commune placée derrière le mur de fond. La qualité du décor mosaïqué fait penser à des pièces réservées à certaines occasions et non destinées à un usage quotidien. La « Maison du trésor » appartient également à ce schéma.

Troisième type
Le plan-type des autres maisons est plus souple : l'escalier de descente débouche dans un couloir qui dessert assez librement les pièces qui peuvent se faire face ou être réparties aux extrémités d'un dégagement, l'aération provenant de fenêtres localisées au niveau supérieur des parois.

Essai d'interprétation
Dans les trois cas, pour certains auteurs, le système de circulation de l'air chaud qui vient rencontrer la fraîcheur de l'eau des puits souterrains constituerait un efficace procédé de climatisation. Cette solution permettrait d'avoir un étage occupé pendant l'hiver et disposant de locaux de service et un autre bénéficiant de la fraîcheur durant l'été. La semi-obscurité, avancée par certains pour voir dans ces espaces des lieux voués à la religion, doit être vue au contraire comme un choix des architectes afin de répondre au besoin de leur clientèle privilégiée. La trouvaille pourrait puiser son origine dans la tradition troglodytique berbère. Pour d'autres auteurs encore, la raison climatique ne saurait être suffisante, en raison de la singularité de la solution trouvée ici. Nombre de cités romaines se situent à des endroits où la situation climatique est analogue. L'explication de la mise en œuvre d'un étage souterrain proviendrait d'une certaine saturation de l'espace urbain et d'une volonté de gain d'espace selon Yvon Thébert. Toutefois, pour Roger Hanoune, cette pénurie de terrain en centre-ville reste à établir et le creusement s'expliquerait par des choix esthétiques — le creusement ornemental se retrouve ailleurs et peut être d'origine hellénistique — et techniques, les étages souterrains semblant réutiliser des citernes.

Édifices religieux
Les édifices religieux de la cité antique restent assez méconnus du fait des fouilles incomplètes qui se sont succédé. En outre, de nombreux bâtiments ayant pu avoir une finalité religieuse sont en trop mauvais état de conservation pour confirmer leur fonction.

Capitole
Le temple de la triade capitoline, élément central de toute cité romaine, est en très mauvais état. Cet édifice se situe sur la partie occidentale du forum, sur un podium, mais seuls des éléments d'un soubassement subsistent, mesurant 16,40 mètres sur 15,50 mètres et 2,70 mètres de hauteur.

Temple d'Apollon
Le temple d'Apollon possède trois sanctuaires joints car la divinité est le deus patrius poliade : avec une cella large, sa cour à portiques et dispensé du podium caractéristique de l'architecture religieuse romaine, il est considéré comme représentatif de l'architecture africaine.

Les vestiges actuels sont liés à une reconstruction du début du IIIe siècle, avec en particulier un décor de la cella composé d'opus sectile, qui aurait succédé à un temple punique peut-être lié au culte de Ba'al. Un premier édifice romain datant du règne de Tibère a vu sa façade remaniée, en raison d'aménagements du forum visant à aboutir à une continuité de la place publique. Lors des fouilles de la cella du temple, des statues cultuelles monumentales ont été découvertes, désormais exposées au musée national du Bardo. Leur dépôt ici date d'une époque tardive, vraisemblablement au moment du triomphe du christianisme dans l'Empire romain.
Les statues d'Apollon citharède, de Cérès et d'Esculape occupent maintenant la salle de Bulla Regia au rez-de-chaussée du musée.

Basiliques religieuses
Deux basiliques chrétiennes ont fait l'objet de fouilles entre 1952 et 1954. La première, ayant sans doute abrité des reliques de saint Étienne datant du VIe siècle, a été occupée jusqu'au VIIIe siècle, période durant laquelle y a été enterré un trésor omeyyade dans une tombe. Elle compte trois nefs et un baptistère qui y est accolé. Les mosaïques de la nef sont pour une partie remarquablement conservées. La seconde basilique est d'une importance moindre : elle s'adosse et communique avec la première et possède également trois nefs. Il semble qu'une partie seulement de la bâtisse possède des mosaïques.

Église d'Alexander ?
Le bâtiment dénommé « église d'Alexander » se situe à proximité des « grands thermes sud », hors du parc archéologique, et les vestiges en sont peu impressionnants. Les fouilles effectuées en 1914 ont déterminé une destruction par le feu et des vases de verre, des grands plats de céramique et surtout des amphores, qui contenaient encore des traces de vin, d'huile et de céréales, ont été découverts en son sein. L'identification à un bâtiment religieux est due à une croix offerte par un prêtre dénommé Alexander et surtout une inscription tirée d'un psaume gravée sur un linteau de porte. Les découvertes mentionnées et la structure de la bâtisse font penser à un lieu de stockage peut-être lié à la perception d'une imposition en nature, voire à un édifice fortifié d'époque byzantine.

Édifices de loisirs
Le site de Bulla Regia abrite également un théâtre et des thermes remarquables, tous deux datés du IIIe siècle. De plus, les vestiges d'un amphithéâtre, hors de l'enceinte du parc archéologique actuel stricto sensu, ont été identifiés mais ces derniers sont fort endommagés. L'une des raisons de l'effacement de ce dernier édifice tient à la construction de la cavea sur des remblais compartimentés, technique particulièrement usitée en Afrique.

Théâtre romain
Le théâtre de Bulla Regia a été construit sous Marc Aurèle et Lucius Aurelius Verus puis rénové au IVe siècle. Saint Augustin aurait prononcé en son sein, vers 399, un sermon condamnant la propension des habitants de la cité aux loisirs et au théâtre, futilités auxquelles les habitants de la cité voisine de Chemtou avaient déjà pour partie renoncé.
Le théâtre est relativement bien conservé, du moins dans les parties inférieures de sa cavea. Il a été dégagé totalement en 1957 par Mongi Boulouednine. Même si cet état de conservation est moindre qu'à Dougga, il n'en reste pas moins fort intéressant du fait de son caractère romain, c'est-à-dire sa construction sur un espace exempt du moindre relief, situation rare dans les limites géographiques de la Tunisie actuelle.
Les arcades sur la rue qui supportaient les niveaux supérieurs des gradins de la cavea sont encore visibles et démontrent la nécessaire adaptation de la circulation à cette emprise du lieu de loisir sur l'espace public. Édifice de taille moyenne avec une emprise de 60 mètres sur 50 mètres, ses trois premiers rangs de gradins sont réservés aux notables locaux et sont plus larges que ceux destinés aux autres spectateurs ; une balustrade sépare les deux espaces de la cavea. Les galeries de circulation, la cavea et la scène sont dans un état de conservation satisfaisant alors qu'il ne reste que de faibles vestiges du mur de scène. Un pavement d'opus sectile ainsi qu'une mosaïque tardive représentant un ours occupent l'orchestra de l'édifice.
C'est dans une pièce de ce monument qu'a été découvert un groupe de quatre statues, désormais exposées au musée national du Bardo : elles représentent Marc Aurèle, Lucius Aurelius Verus et en pendant leurs épouses respectives, Faustine et Lucille, représentées en Cérès.

Thermes romains
Quatre édifices thermaux ont été identifiés à ce jour à Bulla Regia, leur présence étant facilitée par une quantité d'eau locale suffisante. Un édifice de taille moyenne situé à proximité du théâtre aurait fait l'objet d'un long usage et aurait vu en dernier lieu sa décoration mosaïcale refaite au IVe siècle. Il a été identifié comme des thermes privés. Une petite installation privée a aussi été identifiée dans l'état final de la « Maison de la chasse » au IVe siècle et utilisée jusqu'au milieu du VIe siècle. Cependant, bien d'autres installations privées existent sur le site, en lien avec l'opulence des propriétaires, l'effectif total d'installations de ce type reconnues étant situé entre six et huit avec une datation non antérieure au IVe siècle.

D'autres vestiges au sud du site archéologique ont été identifiés comme les « thermes du sud » mais les vestiges en sont ténus et n'ont pas été retenus par Yvon Thébert dans le catalogue de sa synthèse. La bâtisse a été peu étudiée mais l'examen des voûtes effondrées du frigidarium, ainsi que des fouilles anciennes ayant permis entre autres de découvrir un système d'hypocauste, laissent à penser à un vaste ensemble supérieur à 3 000 m2 organisé de façon symétrique.
Les vestiges les plus importants visibles — quoique la fouille effectuée ne soit pas complète — concernent les thermes de Julia Memmia qui, selon les tessons de céramique découverts lors des fouilles menées, peuvent être datés du règne de Sévère Alexandre et sont un témoignage de l'évergétisme de Julia Memmia, fille de l'un des consuls de 191-192. Une inscription révèle le coût important de la construction, de grands travaux étant menés dans le dernier tiers du IVe siècle, la désaffection ne se produisant sans doute pas avant 450 voire durant l'époque byzantine. Illustré par la présence de tessons de céramique arabe, les locaux sont ensuite utilisés à d'autres fins. D'une surface initiale de 2 800 m2, la bâtisse voit à la fin du IVe siècle son emprise atteindre environ 3 300 m2 en dépit de la suppression probable de la palestre, les pièces s'organisant autour du frigidarium dont subsiste la paroi nord sur une hauteur de 15 mètres qui constitue le premier élément impressionnant pour quiconque se rend sur le site. De plus, découverte exceptionnelle, une organisation du cheminement interne des usagers des bains a pu être mise en évidence par l'état de conservation de baies dont la présence ne peut se justifier autrement. L'édifice thermal s'insère également dans le tissu urbain par des aménagements spécifiques de décor de marbre donnant sur la rue et par l'existence d'un espace de transition entre rue et thermes, éléments somptueux dont le cryptoportique faisant en quelque sorte jaillir sur l'extérieur la générosité de la bienfaitrice des lieux.

Autres édifices mal identifiés
Certains auteurs ont voulu identifier l'un des bâtiments entouré de portiques situé sur une esplanade de la cité comme une bibliothèque, l'ancienneté de la ville et le maintien durant une longue période d'une élite locale qui s'est peu à peu romanisée pouvant justifier un tel édifice.

Édifices publics
Forum
Le forum de Bulla Regia, d'une surface supérieure à 1 000 m2, est bordé par un certain nombre de bâtiments qui ont été reconnus pour certains d'entre eux dès le début du XXe siècle : le capitole, le temple d'Apollon au nord et une basilique civile à l'est. En outre, des traces épigraphiques d'autres éléments traditionnels de ce lieu des cités romaines ont été découvertes : des rostres ou tribunes aux harangues mais aussi un tabularium. Par ailleurs, on a retrouvé en réemploi des éléments de la curie locale.
L'accès à la place publique se fait par deux portes, le lieu étant un espace fermé et non ouvert sur les rues. La place est bordée d'une colonnade sur trois de ses côtés. Les divers vestiges sont dans un état de conservation médiocre, hormis ceux du temple d'Apollon, et le dallage de la place est très endommagé. La basilique civile possède trois nefs de 25 mètres sur 6 mètres, dans son état du IIIe siècle, ainsi que deux absides, la justice étant rendue par un magistrat local dans l'une des deux au niveau surélevé.

Marché
Le marché situé à la sortie du forum est relativement tardif, sa construction étant datée du IIIe siècle de par ses commanditaires, les Aradii, dont l'activité est connue à cette époque. Le bâtiment relativement modeste est un rectangle d'environ 11,90 mètres sur 12,60 mètres entouré d'un portique et disposant d'une abside sur l'un de ses côtés. Deux côtés au nord et au sud comportent chacun six boutiques et l'accès au bâtiment peut être fermé après les échanges commerciaux.
Le contexte général de l'époque est une attention particulière des Sévères aux problèmes d'approvisionnement en blé et une telle construction ne peut manquer dans une cité au terroir essentiellement rural.

Monument en opus reticulatum
La bâtisse qui accueille le visiteur possède une façade de 10 mètres ouverte vers l'est. Un chaînage de gros blocs sépare un mur en opus reticulatum, autrefois bordé de portiques sur deux côtés ainsi que d'un mur d'enceinte, dont la décoration intérieure est pour partie réalisée en marbre numidique. Sa destination ainsi que son histoire sont inconnues, Alexandre Lézine évoquant à son sujet une construction du Ier siècle puis une désaffection dès le siècle suivant.

Découvertes effectuées sur le site
Plusieurs mosaïques sont conservées sur le site alors que d'autres peuvent être vues au musée national du Bardo. Les mosaïques de Bulla Regia ne seront pas surpassées en Afrique du Nord où l'art romain des sols en mosaïque atteint son apothéose.

Œuvres in situ
L'exemple le plus célèbre d'œuvres conservées sur le site se trouve dans la « Maison d'Amphitrite » et représente une Vénus marine et non pas Amphitrite, la confusion étant à l'origine du nom donné à la maison. Les premiers fouilleurs ont identifié à tort le personnage féminin à Amphitrite, épouse de Neptune, alors qu'il s'agit de la représentation la plus ancienne qui soit conservée de Vénus marine, déesse de la fécondité et du renouveau. L'usage du motif a un but apotropaïque : il s'agit d'éloigner le mauvais œil par la majesté et la beauté de la divinité.
La déesse figurée nue est entourée de tritons, deux génies étant sur le point de lui poser une couronne au-dessus de la tête et deux Amours lui apportant un miroir et un coffret à bijoux.
Un grand nombre de poissons est figuré sur la partie inférieure de la composition, leur présence ayant contribué à la première interprétation erronée de l'œuvre. La pièce orne le triclinium du sous-sol. À proximité, pour la mosaïque du vestibule, des pierres précieuses ornent les yeux des personnages mais celles-ci furent dérobées dès 1914. Il reste également une mosaïque tardive représentant un grand ours au milieu de l'orchestra du théâtre, édifice qui abrite en outre une statue acéphale de togatus dans son couloir d'accès.

Œuvres déposées à l'antiquarium du site
Le petit musée du site ne comporte que deux salles, l'une consacrée à la période punique et numide et la seconde à la période romaine de la cité.
Dans la première sont déposées quelques stèles puniques et néo-puniques avec des représentations du signe de Tanit ou des représentations humaines. Les vestiges d'un temple présumé avoir été dédié à Tanit en occupent le centre, en particulier un chapiteau ionique avec les motifs d'un signe de Tanit sur l'une de ses faces. Dans la seconde, on trouve des caissons funéraires sculptés et surtout une représentation d'une notable locale.

Œuvres déposées au musée national du Bardo
Le musée national du Bardo accueille un certain nombre d'œuvres majeures en provenance du site et qui contribuent à sa renommée, tant dans le domaine de la statuaire que des mosaïques d'époque romaine.

Statuaire
Les découvertes effectuées sur le site sont remarquables et l'existence de plusieurs ateliers de sculpteurs dans cette petite ville à l'époque impériale a été démontrée.
Le groupe découvert lors des fouilles du temple d'Apollon en 1902-1905 est un élément emblématique du musée. Ces statues destinées au culte ont dû être dissimulées à une époque tardive. Une statue d'Apollon citharède datant du IIe siècle est la plus grande d'entre elles, avec une taille supérieure à trois mètres, et elle conserve des traces de polychromie. Le dieu est dans une posture alanguie, le bras droit tenant sa tête et le bras gauche s'appuyant sur une lyre. Sur l'instrument est représenté un barbare qui aiguise le couteau qui, dans le mythe, sert à punir Marsyas, le satyre qui avait osé défier le dieu dans un concours. Une statue du Saturne africain couronné et portant une corne d'abondance de 1,92 mètre de haut se trouve à ses côtés, synthèse de la mythologie gréco-romaine et d'éléments locaux. Une représentation d'Athéna poliade est quant à elle représentée dans une posture classique, avec un casque, une tête de Méduse sur la poitrine et une lance.
On y trouve également une statue acéphale de Minerve-Victoire, vêtue d'une longue tunique à rabat retenue sous les seins par un cordon, le corps en appui sur la jambe gauche, ainsi qu'une statue d'une prêtresse du culte impérial ou flaminique dite Minia Procula, du nom trouvé sur une base toujours en place : le personnage de 1,84 mètre est représenté avec réalisme et son origine africaine a été mise en avant.
Les quatre statues découvertes au théâtre sont également remarquables : deux statues assises représentent Marc Aurèle et Lucius Aurelius Verus, œuvres remarquables en raison du traitement apporté aux visages et aux chevelures. Elles étaient accompagnées de deux statues féminines, vraisemblablement les impératrices et épouses de ces deux derniers empereurs, représentées en Cérès.
Un portrait de Vespasien datant de la fin du Ier siècle a été trouvé dans un puits dans la cour du temple d'Apollon : l'empereur est représenté ridé, dégarni et vraisemblablement à la fin de sa vie. Cet empereur a joué un rôle dans l'histoire de la ville avec l'octroi du statut de municipe.
Les œuvres découvertes à Bulla Regia seraient, selon Nayla Attya-Ouertani, un témoignage de « la tendance au baroque si répandue parmi les artistes africains de cette époque, tendance qui se traduit par un foisonnement des drapés et une attention spéciale réservée au traitement des chevelures ».

Mosaïques
Les fouilles ont livré également de nombreuses mosaïques dont la célèbre Délivrance d'Andromède par Persée : le héros, qui vient de tuer un monstre marin, aide d'un geste majestueux la princesse qui était enchaînée à un rocher. Le monstre est sous ses pieds sous la forme d'un dragon. Le dieu fleuve est figuré au bas du tableau et symbolise le milieu dans lequel vivait le monstre. La scène qu'évoque Ovide remonte à un prototype peut-être conçu par le peintre grec Nicias. Cette œuvre est remarquablement bien exécutée avec un effet d'ombre et de lumière et une maîtrise de la notion d'espace. Cette mosaïque constitue à l'origine le tableau central de l'œcus d'une salle de réception d'une riche villa (milieu du IIIe siècle). Une mosaïque figurant une scène d'Amours chasseurs aux prises avec des fauves, qui a donné son nom à la « Maison de la chasse », a été déposée également au musée.

Redécouverte du site
Le sable a protégé les emplacements abandonnés qui ont été oubliés jusqu'à ce que les premiers explorateurs européens s'intéressent au site. Les premiers dont une trace ait été conservée ne remontent pas à une date antérieure à 1853. Ces précurseurs décrivent parfois des éléments qui ont disparu depuis et dont l'identification et parfois la localisation posent problème. Les fouilles des sépultures et des basiliques débutent à l'extrême fin du XIXe siècle tout comme les premières explorations des thermes de Julia Memmia.

Les premières véritables excavations ne débutent qu'en 1906, en partie stimulées par la destruction de l'entrée monumentale de la ville romaine du fait de travaux de voirie. Entre 1909 et 1924, une véritable excavation des grands thermes a lieu. Quant au temple d'Apollon, il est dégagé vers 1910 alors que le forum, entouré de portiques, est excavé pour sa part entre 1949 et 1952. En 1955, des travaux stabilisent les ruines des thermes alors qu'un certain nombre de voies sont dégagées entre 1957 et 1961 et permettent de passer d'un monument à l'autre afin de se faire une idée de la configuration de la cité antique. Ces dégagements sont réalisés sans réelles investigations scientifiques, le but premier du jeune État tunisien étant de sortir une frange importante de la population locale du chômage.
Cependant, l'apport essentiel de la période est la conservation de l'essentiel du site au sein d'un parc archéologique, protégeant l'essentiel, et l'empêchement de l'installation d'habitations sur les flancs du Djebel R'bia. À partir de 1972, des fouilles franco-tunisiennes menées notamment par Azedine Beschaouch et Yvon Thébert reprennent un certain nombre de recherches et procèdent surtout à des publications sur les découvertes anciennes laissées en souffrance.
Le constat d'un siècle de recherches sur le site reste en demi-teinte : si des œuvres artistiques majeures ont pu être dégagées, de même que des éléments d'une architecture originale suscitant le débat, la dispersion, le manque de rigueur dans les premières fouilles et l'absence de publications — seules capables de pérenniser les constats faits par les premiers fouilleurs — obligent souvent à reprendre lorsque c'est possible l'étude systématique des bâtisses déjà dégagées, avant d'envisager la moindre extension du périmètre fouillé.
En vue de ces nouvelles fouilles, les vestiges sont désormais protégés par un parc archéologique qui peut remplir son rôle de protection, même s'il n'englobe pas l'amphithéâtre.

Notes et références
Bibliographie
: document utilisé comme source pour la rédaction de cet article.

Ouvrages sur Bulla Regia
Azaiz Antit, Henri Broise et Yvon Thébert, « Les environs immédiats de Bulla Regia », dans Recherches archéologiques franco-tunisiennes à Bulla Regia, t. I : Miscellanea, Rome, École française de Rome, 1983, p. 135-190.
Azedine Beschaouch, Roger Hanoune et Yvon Thébert, Les ruines de Bulla Regia, Rome, École française de Rome, 1977, 144 p. (ISBN 2-7283-0439-4). .
Moheddine Chaouali, Bulla Regia : Bulla la royale, Tunis, Simpact, 2010, 131 p. (ISBN 978-9973054708).
Roger Hanoune, « Une mosaïque de cella de temple à Bulla Regia (Tunisie) », Colloque sur la mosaïque gréco-romaine, vol. VII, no 2,‎ 1994, p. 747-750.
Roger Hanoune, Recherches archéologiques franco-tunisiennes à Bulla Regia, t. IV : Les mosaïques, Rome, École française de Rome, 1980 (ISBN 978-2728300051).
Yvon Thébert, « La romanisation d'une cité indigène d'Afrique : Bulla Regia », Mélanges de l'École française de Rome, vol. 85, no 1,‎ 1973, p. 247-312 (lire en ligne).
Yvon Thébert, « Bulla Regia », dans Gabriel Camps (dir.), Encyclopédie berbère, vol. 11 : Bracelets – Caprarienses, Aix-en-Provence, Édisud, 1992 (ISBN 2-85744-581-4, lire en ligne), p. 1647-1653 .
Yvon Thébert, « Bulla Regia », dans Dictionnaire de la civilisation phénicienne et punique, Turnhout, Brepols, 1992 (ISBN 978-2503500331).

Ouvrages généraux
Aïcha Ben Abed-Ben Khedher, Le musée du Bardo : une visite guidée, Tunis, Cérès, 1992, 76 p. (ISBN 978-9973700834). .
Claude Briand-Ponsart et Christophe Hugoniot, L'Afrique romaine : de l'Atlantique à la Tripolitaine, 146 av. J.-C. - 533 apr. J.-C., Paris, Armand Colin, 2005, 569 p. (ISBN 978-2200268381).
Paul Corbier et Marc Griesheimer, L'Afrique romaine : 146 av. J.-C. - 439 apr. J.-C., Paris, Ellipses, 2005, 432 p. (ISBN 978-2729824419).
Jean-Claude Golvin, L'Antiquité retrouvée, Paris, Errance, 2003, 191 p. (ISBN 978-2877722667). .
Pierre Gros, L'architecture romaine du début du IIIe siècle av. J.-C. à la fin du Haut-Empire, t. 1 : monuments publics, Paris, Picard, 1996, 503 p. (ISBN 978-2708405004). .
Pierre Gros, L'architecture romaine du début du IIIe siècle av. J.-C. à la fin du Haut-Empire, t. 2 : Maisons, palais, villas et tombeaux, Paris, Picard, 2001, 527 p. (ISBN 978-2708405332). .
Christophe Hugoniot, Rome en Afrique : de la chute de Carthage aux débuts de la conquête arabe, Paris, Flammarion, 2000, 352 p. (ISBN 978-2080830036). .
Yann Le Bohec, Histoire de l'Afrique romaine : 146 avant J.-C. - 439 après J.-C., Paris, Picard, 2005, 282 p. (ISBN 978-2708407510).
Edward Lipinski (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation phénicienne et punique, Turnhout, Brepols, 1992, 502 p. (ISBN 978-2503500331). .
Ammar Mahjoubi, Villes et structures de la province romaine d'Afrique, Tunis, Centre de publication universitaire, 2000, 271 p. (ISBN 978-9973937957).
Guillemette Mansour, Tunisie : musée à ciel ouvert, Tunis, Dad, 2006, 117 p. (ISBN 978-9973512130).
Hédi Slim et Nicolas Fauqué, La Tunisie antique : de Hannibal à saint Augustin, Paris, Mengès, 2001, 259 p. (ISBN 978-2856204214). .
Yvon Thébert, « Vie privée et architecture domestique en Afrique romaine », dans Paul Veyne (dir.), Histoire de la vie privée, t. 1, Paris, Éditions du Seuil, 1985 (ISBN 978-2020089869), p. 301-415.
Yvon Thébert, Thermes romains d'Afrique du Nord et leur contexte méditerranéen : études d'histoire et d'archéologie, Rome, École française de Rome, 2003, 733 p. (ISBN 978-2728303984). .
Mohamed Yacoub, Splendeurs des mosaïques de Tunisie, Tunis, Agence nationale du patrimoine, 1995, 420 p. (ISBN 978-9973917232). .
Collectif, La Tunisie : carrefour du monde antique, Dijon, Faton, 1994, 135 p. (ISBN 978-2878440201). .
Collectif, L'Afrique romaine : 69-439, Neuilly-sur-Seine, Atlande, 2006, 383 p. (ISBN 978-2350300023). .

Voir aussi
Articles connexes
Royaume de Numidie
Civilisation carthaginoise
Histoire de Carthage
Afrique romaine
Romanisation (histoire)

Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire  

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Rome antique   Portail des Phéniciens et de la civilisation carthaginoise



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
KERKOUANE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: ancient_city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:54:51


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 661
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerkouane
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kerkouane or Kerkuane (Arabic: كركوان, Karkwān) is the site of an ancient Punic city in north-eastern Tunisia, near Cape Bon. Kerkouane was one of the most important Punic cities, with Carthage, Hadrumetum (modern Sousse), and Utica. This Phoenician city was probably abandoned during the First Punic War (c. 250 BC) and was not rebuilt by the Romans. It had existed for almost 400 years.
UNESCO declared the Punic town of Kerkouane and its necropolis a World Heritage Site in 1985, citing among other things that the remains constitute the only example of a Phoenicio-Punic city to have survived.
The name Kerkouane was given to the town by archaeologists. Its name in antiquity has not been preserved in any known historical documents.

Etymology
The name Kerkouane is a Libyco-Berber toponym deriving from Berber kkerker "to wall up", it is also found in Algeria and the Sahel region.

Excavations
Kerkouane is a small town and was probably never home to more than 1,200 people, mostly fishermen and craftsmen. Based on the presence of many murex shells, it would appear that the town produced purple dye, in addition to salt and garum (a food product).
Excavations of the town have revealed ruins and coins from the 4th and 3rd centuries BC. Around the site where the layout is clearly visible, many houses still show their walls, and the coloured clay on the facades is often still visible. The town was built on a grid with wide streets and public squares. The houses were built to a standard plan, in accordance with a sophisticated notion of town planning.
Traces of red ochre found in excavated tombs are common also to native Libyan burial customs, but the religious and architectural traditions of the town are predominantly of Carthaginian style. A black-figure wine jug decorated with a scene from The Odyssey found with an Ionian cup, and Greek architectural elements like peristyle courtyards and stucco plaster decorations found among the remains of upscale private homes, show the town was influenced by the culture of the greater Mediterranean world.
A sanctuary has some columns preserved, and in a small atrium parts of mosaics are found. Curbstones, doorsteps, thresholds, and floors of simple mosaic layers are found all over the ruins.
There is an area for ritual banquets and a sacrificial altar. While archaeologists are unsure precisely which deities the temple was dedicated to, they speculate based on artifacts found at the site that it may have been Melqart, Sid and Tanit. Terracotta heads showing two males wearing conical hats resemble Sid and Melqart iconography known from the Temple of Antas in Sardinia.

Climate change
Due to its coastal location, Kerkouane is vulnerable to sea level rise. In 2022, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report included it in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with the warming of over 4 °C., and is no longer considered very likely. The other, more plausible scenarios result in lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet, sea levels would continue to increase for about 10,000 years under all of them. Even if the warming is limited to 1.5 °C, global sea level rise is still expected to exceed 2–3 m (7–10 ft) after 2000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger increases by then), consequently exceeding 2100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~0.75 m (2 ft) with a range of 0.5–1 m (2–3 ft)) well before the year 4000. Thus, it is a matter of time before Kerkouane is threatened by rising water levels, unless it can be protected by adaptation efforts such as sea walls.

See also
Sanctuary of Thinissut

References
Gallery
External links
 Media related to Kerkouane at Wikimedia Commons
Lexicorient Archived 2011-11-13 at the Wayback Machine
Kerkounane Guide


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 2,731
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerkouane
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kerkouane (arabe : كركوان, soit Kar-kwān) est un site antique tunisien situé sur la côte orientale de la péninsule du cap Bon, à six kilomètres au nord de Hammam Ghezèze.
Il abrite une cité et une nécropole puniques inscrites sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco depuis le 28 novembre 1986 car ce sont les seuls exemples d'architecture punique à n'avoir pas subi de modifications de la part de civilisations postérieures. En effet, probablement détruite et abandonnée durant la première guerre punique (milieu du IIIe siècle av. J.-C.), la cité ne sera pas reconstruite par les Romains.
Kerkouane, l'une des plus importantes cités puniques avec Carthage, Hadrumète et Utique, exista pendant près de 400 ans (entre 650 av. J.-C. et 250 av. J.-C.).

Histoire
Nombreuses questions
Les fouilles sont l'unique source en l'absence d'informations écrites. Elles permettent de penser que les Libyens ont habité le site avant l'installation de la culture punique. Si le toponyme Kerkouane est consacré par l'usage, le vrai nom de la cité n'a pas pu être déterminé.

Les dates de fondation et d'extinction de la cité ne sont pas non plus documentées, le matériel dégagé (notamment dans les nécropoles) situant la période d'existence de cette cité entre le VIe siècle av. J.-C. et le milieu du IIIe siècle av. J.-C.
Elle disparaît très probablement à la suite de l'expédition destructrice d'Agathocle de Syracuse dans le cap Bon, aux environs de 310 av. J.-C., suivie d'une deuxième expédition menée par Marcus Atilius Régulus en 256 av. J.-C..

Fouilles
La découverte du site, plus ou moins due au hasard, est attribuée à Pierre Cintas et Charles Saumagne et date de 1952. Les fouilles ont été entreprises sur quatre périodes. La première fouille régulière démarre en 1953 sous la direction de Cintas (alors inspecteur des antiquités puniques à Tunis) et permet la mise au jour de la nécropole, d'un quartier d'habitation et de ses composantes architecturales. Ceci donne une première idée sur les activités économique et religieuse de la cité ainsi que sa chronologie ; plusieurs éléments, dont l'absence de signe de présence romaine comme des céramiques, permet d'opter pour l'hypothèse d'un site punique. La découverte d'une coupe ionienne permet de dater la fondation approximative du site avant le VIe siècle av. J.-C.
En vue des fouilles organisées entre 1957 et 1961, au lendemain de l'indépendance de la Tunisie, le chantier et le contrôle des travaux sont confiés aux techniciens de l'Institut national d'archéologie et d'art sous la responsabilité de Mongi Boulouednine. Avec la fin du protectorat, le nombre considérable d'ouvriers — M'hamed Hassine Fantar parle de « véritable chantier de chômage » — visant à l'embauche de la main-d'œuvre non spécialisée ainsi que le départ des cadres scientifiques français font que « les travaux des fouilles se limitaient au dégagement de l'édifice et au ramassage du matériel ».

Ceci a permis de reconnaître officiellement l'importance de ce site et de dégager une partie des murailles, des portes, des rues et des quartiers d'habitation, ainsi que du matériel comme de la poterie, des figurines, des pièces de monnaie, des objets en bronze, etc. L'ensemble des objets du site sont aujourd'hui exposés dans un musée installé à proximité.
Les fouilles effectuées de 1965 à 1966 sont tenues dans le cadre d'un séminaire international organisé par le Centre de la recherche archéologique et historique, sous la direction d'Ammar Mahjoubi, et avec la participation de jeunes archéologues tunisiens et de professeurs et étudiants algériens, belges, français, italiens et hollandais. Elles permettent de dégager une villa, un insula et la nécropole avec l'ouverture des tombes et l'exploration de leur contenu funéraire. Les fouilles dirigées par M'hamed Hassine Fantar de 1976 à 1977 aboutissent notamment à mettre au jour le plus grand sanctuaire punique de toute la Méditerranée occidentale.
Entre les périodes de fouilles, des activités de réfection, de nettoyage, de désherbage et de consolidation sont entreprises afin de faire face à un environnement littoral hostile, avec des vagues et des vents marins chargés de sel et destructeurs de monuments fragilisés par les dégagements. Au cours du séminaire international de 2001, les vestiges d'une chapelle dépendant du grand temple viennent enrichir les connaissances sur l'architecture religieuse à Kerkouane et dans le monde punique.

Site
Le site couvre une superficie d'environ huit hectares et on évalue sa population d'origine à 2 000 habitants environ. Bien que située en bordure de la mer Méditerranée, la ville ne disposait pas de port : les barques des pêcheurs devaient être tirées sur la grève, dans l'une des deux criques situées non loin de la ville, les plus gros bâtiments pouvant s'abriter dans le port d'Aspis, l'actuelle Kélibia.

Enceinte
La muraille est constituée de deux enceintes séparées par un vaste couloir intermédiaire, dont la largeur varie de sept à treize mètres, qui sert à la circulation entre les deux enceintes et les bâtiments destinés à renforcer le système défensif : tours de garde et d'observation, escaliers ou cages d'escaliers conduisant au chemin de ronde, portes et poternes. À l'origine, les deux enceintes sont crépies et blanchies à la chaux et atteignent, avec le couloir intermédiaire, environ quinze mètres d'épaisseur. L'enceinte interne présente une structure proche de certaines villes d'Orient avec des pierres en arêtes de poissons ou en épi. 
Parmi les portes de la cité, la porte dite du couchant, d'aspect coudé, est composée d'une baie antérieure faisant partie de l'enceinte externe de la muraille, suivie d'un passage coudé et d'une baie postérieure ouvrant sur l'une des principales rues de la cité. Ce type de porte à recouvrement semble relever d'une architecture orientale plutôt que grecque. La deuxième porte dite du sud est formée de deux baies antérieure et postérieure séparées par un passage ; les trois éléments sont aménagés dans le même axe.

Plan général
Les quartiers d'habitation et les édifices publics, civils ou religieux sont disposés suivant un plan d'urbanisme où les rues se croisent orthogonalement et imposent un plan aéré de la cité disposé en damiers, le tout élaboré à l'intérieur d'une muraille séparant la cité des vivants des nécropoles et des terres cultivables. L'architecture se distingue par la diversité des matériaux et des techniques de construction utilisés.

Les rues de la cité sont particulièrement larges, avec une moyenne supérieure à quatre mètres, ce qui permet une circulation piétonne aisée et donne à la cité un aspect très aéré. Les rues délimitent des îlots ou groupes d'habitations, si bien qu'à quelques exceptions près, l'ensemble est si bien structuré qu'il semble avoir été conçu dans les grandes lignes avant la construction de la cité. Les places ne ressemblent en rien à l'agora des cités grecques ou au forum des cités romaines mais à un espace plus ou moins ouvert sur d'autres bâtiments, ce qui s'apparente aux places des cités orientales. Trois places principales se trouvaient dans le même secteur, distantes de quelques mètres, et représentaient vraisemblablement un centre socioéconomique : plusieurs fragments de poteries de différents types (amphores, assiettes, coupes, cruches ou œnochés, plats ou vasques) ont été retrouvés, de même que des pièces de monnaie portant la tête d'une divinité féminine sur l'envers et un cheval sur l'avers. Ceci renforce l'hypothèse d'un espace de rencontre et de commerce.
Le système hydraulique urbain est remarquable en raison du drainage des eaux usées, du réseau de citernes, canalisations et gargouilles sculptées pour les eaux de ruissellement, etc.

Techniques de construction
Divers matériaux ont été utilisés dans la construction des bâtiments ; leur utilisation varie en fonction du type de bâtiment et de son statut économique. Ces matériaux pouvaient être de la terre, de l'argile, de la brique crue ou cuite, de la pierre brute ou de taille, ainsi que des pierres de valeur telles que l'obsidienne, le marbre, la pâte de verre ou le basalte. Pour les gros blocs ou les dallages, le grès à ciment de calcaire ou de silicate était utilisé.
En parallèle aux matériaux, les techniques de construction sont très diverses : utilisation des pierres de taille liées avec des crampons métalliques en queue d'aronde, la technique dite de l'opus africanum, à harpes verticales ou la construction en pisé. Pour la décoration, les colonnes, les pilastres, les chapiteaux et les corniches dans les cours ou les façades sont utilisés comme éléments organiques. Des moulures et des appliques en stuc ou en plâtre le long des plafonds, des images peintes sur les murs, des sols pavés en opus signinum, avec parfois des signes religieux tel que le signe de Tanit servent d'éléments strictement décoratifs. Des gargouilles zoomorphes sont par ailleurs utilisées pour assurer l'évacuation des eaux depuis les toits, probablement ceux des édifices religieux.

Édifices privés
Les maisons de Kerkouane sont typiques des maisons puniques, de forme quadrilatère, la porte d'entrée donnant sur un couloir ou un vestibule coudé permettant de conserver l'intimité de la vie familiale. Le corridor peut parfois comporter une banquette et ses parois murales peuvent comporter un enduit protecteur fait de chaux, de sable et de restes de poteries. Il donne souvent accès à une cour de taille et de forme très variables mais se présentant soit comme un simple quadrilatère découvert, soit en partie protégé par un portique sur un, deux, trois, voire quatre côtés. Le portique est supporté par des colonnes à base cylindrique ou des pilastres à section quadrangulaire sur des bases moulurées. La cour comporte souvent un puits et un départ d'escalier qui devait conduire à une chambre haute.
Autour du patio s'ordonnent les pièces d'habitation dont l'une peut être destinée aux réceptions et communique avec une dépendance obscure (thalamos). Certaines chambres comportent des armoires aménagées dans le mur sous forme de niches. Le sol des pièces et du patio est le plus souvent pavé en opus signinum, avec des éclats de marbre blanc, ou en opus tessellatum, avec des éclats de verre bleu et d'obsidienne. Le sol du patio est bâti en pente très douce pour faciliter l'évacuation des eaux pluviales et usées vers le vestibule ou l'extérieur.
Chaque maison possédait sa salle de bains, située près du vestibule d'entrée et non des chambres, et pavée de mosaïques. Une baignoire-sabot avec un ou deux sièges, couverte d'un enduit rouge hydrofuge que lui confère la poterie pilée, fait face à un évier de même constitution.

Édifices religieux
Le sanctuaire de Kerkouane figure parmi les rares édifices publics de la cité. En effet, la majorité des bâtiments dégagés sont des habitations domestiques. Or, le sanctuaire est annoncé par deux bases moulurées de pilastres visibles en bordure de la rue et qui donne accès à un vestibule en forme de quadrilatère irrégulier de 7,5 m2 pavé en opus signinum. Les parois sont recouvertes d'un enduit réalisé à partir de chaux et de poteries broyées. Du côté droit du vestibule, on accède à une salle oblongue de six mètres de long sur deux mètres de large, dotée sur les quatre côtés de banquettes couvertes d'une couche d'enduit hydrofuge composé de chaux et de poterie broyées et lissées au polissoir.
Le sanctuaire est centré sur une vaste cour qui dessert plusieurs pièces sur les deux côtés. Au fond de la cour se trouvent deux podia contigus, élevés d'environ soixante centimètres du sol et surplombant celle-ci. À mi-distance entre la salle à banquettes et les deux podia est érigé un autel de forme parallélépipède et taillé dans un bloc de grès calcaire.
Le long de l'aile droite se trouvent plusieurs pièces, dont la première comporte à son centre un four en forme d'ellipse avec une paroi en terre rouge ; il est consolidé par des tuiles en briques cuites losangiforme et renforcé par des galets. Les deux pièces suivantes ont une forme quadrilatère irrégulière : l'une est pavée de plusieurs couches de galets destinées à neutraliser l'effet de l'humidité, l'autre (dite atelier) est un espace vaste dont les parois et le sol sont couverts d'un enduit hydrofuge et qui comporte une installation hydraulique, une salle d'eau, un puits et un bassin avec une canalisation en plomb aménagée pour l'évacuation des eaux usées.
Derrière les podia se situe une large aire à ciel ouvert, d'environ dix mètres sur huit, dont le dégagement a permis de découvrir une couche de cendre mêlée à des ossements d'animaux, des poteries ordinaires et à vernis noir, des objets en métal, des pièces de monnaie. Cette aire comporte un puits, dont la fouille a dégagé une grande quantité de poteries bien conservées, une cachette se présentant sous la forme d'une margelle de puits où un grand nombre de lampes et de bols ont été retrouvés, un amas de galets haut de soixante centimètres surmontant une couche de cendre faite de charbon, d'ossements, de tessons de poteries, un autel votif, des objets métalliques, etc. La présence de cet amas a conduit les chercheurs à identifier le caractère sacré de ce monument. Le sanctuaire semble avoir été destiné au culte de diverses divinités, dont plusieurs figurines en terre cuite y ont été découvertes, tel un fragment de figurine d'une divinité féminine (Astarté ou Tanit), une tête barbue (Ba'al Hammon, Eshmoun ou Melkart) et une tête imberbe.

Nécropoles
Deux grands sanctuaires puniques, dont l'un est le plus grand jamais découvert, sont situés au cœur de la ville et non pas en périphérie comme c'est généralement le cas pour les villes romaines. Au-delà du périmètre de la cité, les nécropoles sont au nombre de quatre, dont deux dans des falaises relativement proches : celle au nord semble en grande partie réservée aux enfants, inhumés dans des jarres placées dans des fosses, celle au sud étant réservée à l'inhumation des adultes directement enterrés dans des fosses. Deux autres nécropoles sont aménagées dans les collines : l'une au nord dite « nécropole d'Erg el-Ghazouani » et l'autre à l'ouest, toutes deux constituées de caveaux de type classique avec un escalier, un dromos et une chambre funéraire taillée dans le grès d'où a été retiré un mobilier funéraire important et semblable à celui de Carthage.

Génétique
Une étude génétique de Hannah M. Moots et al. publiée en 2022 portant sur la Méditerranée centrale de l'âge du fer montre que douze individus de la petite cité punique de Kerkouane présentent un profil très hétérogène. Un premier groupe de sept individus montrent de fortes affinités avec les populations siciliennes et grecques de l'âge du bronze. Un individu parmi ces douze échantillons est similaire aux Marocains et Mozabites actuels tandis que quatre autres présentent une continuité génétique avec les agriculteurs néolithiques maghrébins qui précèdent, ce qui suggère que ces individus représentent une population nord-africaine autochtone. De manière surprenante, les auteurs notent l'absence d'influence génétique levantine/phénicienne substantielle et proposent comme explications des rites funéraires différents (incinération) ou une colonisation superficielle impliquant peu d'individus phéniciens. Au niveau archéologique, la présence de colons grecs de Sicile à Kerkouane est par ailleurs bien attestée. Les auteurs notent que « la contribution des populations autochtones d'Afrique du Nord dans l'histoire carthaginoise est obscurcie par l'utilisation de termes tels que « Phéniciens occidentaux », et même dans une certaine mesure, « puniques », dans la littérature pour désigner les Carthaginois ». Selon les auteurs, ces termes suggèrent une population principalement coloniale et minimisent le rôle des populations autochtones dans l'empire carthaginois. En conséquence, le rôle des populations autochtones a été largement négligé dans les études sur le monde carthaginois.

Notes et références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
M'hamed Hassine Fantar, Kerkouane : cité punique du Cap Bon (Tunisie), t. I, Tunis, Institut national d'archéologie et d'art, 1984, 577 p.
M'hamed Hassine Fantar, Kerkouane : cité punique du Cap Bon (Tunisie), t. II : Architecture domestique, Tunis, Institut national d'archéologie et d'art, 1985, 740 p.
M'hamed Hassine Fantar, Kerkouane : cité punique du Cap Bon (Tunisie), t. III : Sanctuaires et cultes : société-économie, Tunis, Institut national d'archéologie et d'art, 1986, 634 p.
M'hamed Hassine Fantar, Kerkouane : une cité punique au Cap-Bon, Tunis, Maison tunisienne de l'édition, 1987, 216 p.
M'hamed Hassine Fantar, Kerkouane : cité punique au pays berbère de Tamezrat, VIe – IIIe siècle avant J.-C., Tunis, Alif, 1998, 125 p.
Hubert Gallet de Santerre et Latifa Slim, Recherches sur les nécropoles puniques de Kerkouane, Tunis, Institut national d'archéologie et d'art, 1983, 47 p.

Liens internes
Histoire de Carthage
Musée archéologique de Kerkouane

Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative à l'architecture : Liste du patrimoine mondial  

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail de l’archéologie   Portail des Phéniciens et de la civilisation carthaginoise   Portail du patrimoine mondial


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 506
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Kerkouane
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Understand
A Phoenician city, Kerkouane was probably abandoned in 3rd century BCE and, therefore, largely ignored by the Romans. As such it is probably the only example of its kind to survive. Noted for its clear demonstration of town planning techniques. The town and its necropolis are a UNESCO World Heritage List site.

## Get in
Approximately 80 km to the east of Tunis, equidistant (20 km) between the towns of Keliba and El Haouaria.
Buses run from Kelibia and can drop you at the turn off for the ruins from which it is a 1½ km walk. (Unsure where to find these busses, taxi drivers had no information either)
A taxi there from Kelibia should cost about 4-10 DT. No meters here so settle on a price with the taxi drive before going. For the return trip, a taxi driver proposed a price of 2 DT (picking up other passengers on the way). It might be a wait for a taxi on the return and you'll have to get out to the main road (1½ km) but don't hesitate to flag down taxis with passengers as well. Otherwise, you can arrange with the taxi driver to wait for you (probably unnecessary as there are taxis that pass by), or you could hitchhike.
The site could be visited as a day trip from Tunis, Hammamet or perhaps even Sousse. Take a louage to Kelibia (no buses nor trains), which costs about 6.5 DT from Bab Alioua in Tunis. Taxis wait just beside the louage stop.

## Get around
The remains are easy to walk around. Some form of transport from the main road may be useful as it is about a 1½ km walk

## See
7 DT for entrance to the ruins with 1 DT for photo rights.
The remains are well marked out and set on a nice stretch of coast line. Allow the best part of an hour to do them justice.
36.94776811.0986061 Musée archéologique De Kerkouane. Tu-Su 16/09 - 16/06 9:00 - 16:00. 18/07 - 15/09 9:00 - 18:00. 17/06 - 17/07 9:30 - 17:00. A small museum detailing the archeological finds and history of the site, included in price. 7 Dt.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Do
Explore the remains and look out for the minimalist mosaics of the Punic God Tanit
Sit beside the sea and relax. The sea is rather agitated here!
Picnic in the old town square, under the big tree.

## Buy
There is a small gift shop in the museum that sells tourist oriented products.

## Sleep
The best place to base yourself for accommodation would be the nearby town of Kelibia, but a day trip should suffice.

## Go next
Tunis
Nabeul
Hammamet
Kelibia, famous for her great beaches, popular with locals. Ask the taxi drivers to bring you to the beach, or just head southwards and you'll come upon the sea, which is very calm here. Also has an old Roman Fort, 7 DT for entrance.
El Haouaria, good for hiking by the sea.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SOUSSE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:55:01


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,523
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sousse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sousse,  Sūsah , or Soussa (Arabic: سوسة, IPA: [ˈsuːsa] ), is a city in Tunisia, capital of the Sousse Governorate. Located 140 km (87 mi) south of the capital Tunis, the city has 271,428 inhabitants (2014). Sousse is in the central-east of the country, on the Gulf of Hammamet, which is a part of the Mediterranean Sea. Its economy is based on transport equipment, processed food, olive oil, textiles, and tourism. It is home to the Université de Sousse.

Toponymy
Sousse and Soussa are both French spellings of the Arabic name Sūsa. The present city has also grown to include the ruins of Hadrumetum, which had many names in several languages during antiquity.

Geography
Sousse is in eastern Tunisia, on the Tunisian Sahel coast bordering the Mediterranean Sea. The city covers 45 km2 and is 25 meters above sea level.
Sousse is between two wadis: the Wadi Bliban (and its tributary the Wadi al-Kharrub) to the north and northwest and the Wadi al-Halluf to the southeast. The subsoil is mostly sedimentary with some deep alluvial deposits, which are more recent closer to the coast. Winters are generally mild, there is an average of 69 days of rainfall per year, and there is a lot of sunshine year-round with relatively few cloudy days.

Administration
The Municipality of Sousse is the capital of a governorate that extends over 2669 km2. It is divided into four municipal districts: Sousse Nord, Sousse Sud, Sousse Médina and Sousse Riadh. The first two were created on 11 February 1976 and the last two on 19 February 1982. Its main constituencies and Delegation are four in number: Sousse Sidi Abdelhamid, Sousse Médina, Sousse Jawhara and Sousse Riadh. Its geographic code is 31.

History
Hadrumetum
In the 11th century BC, Tyrians established Hadrumetum as a trading post and waypoint along their trade routes to Italy and the Strait of Gibraltar. Its establishment (at a river mouth about 9.7 km or 6 mi north of old Sousse) preceded Carthage's but, like other western Phoenician colonies, it became part of the Carthaginian Empire following Nebuchadnezzar II's long siege of Tyre in the 580s and 570s BC.
The city featured in the Third Sicilian War, the Second and Third Punic Wars (in the latter of which it secured additional territory and special privileges by aiding Rome against what was left of the Carthaginians), and Caesar's Civil War, when it was the scene of Caesar's famously deft recovery: upon tripping while coming ashore, he dealt with the poor omen this threatened to become by grabbing handfuls of dirt and proclaiming "I have you now, Africa!" (Latin: Teneo te Africa!) The second city in Roman Africa after Carthage, it became the capital of the province of Byzacena during the Diocletianic Reforms. Its native sons included the jurist Salvius Julianus, the emperor Clodius Albinus, and numerous Christian saints. The Roman and Byzantine catacombs beneath the city are extensive: they were mainly investigated in 1913-1927 by French missionaries and soldiers.
The Vandals sacked Hadrumetum in 434 but it remained a place of importance within their kingdom; a bishop and proconsul were martyred there during the Vandals' periodic forced conversions of their subjects to Arianism. The Byzantine Empire reconquered the town in 534 during the Vandal War and engaged in a public works program that included new fortifications and churches. The town was sacked during the Umayyad Caliphate's 7th-century conquest of North Africa. According to a 1987 ICOMOS report, Uqba ibn Nafi's siege and capture of the city resulted in its almost complete destruction, such that no monument of Hadrumetum "subsists in situ".

Medieval Susa
Muslim Arab armies rapidly spread Arab culture across what had been a thoroughly Romanized and Christianized landscape. Under the Aghlabids, Susa was established near the ruins of Hadrumetum and served as their main port. Their 827 invasion of Sicily was mainly launched from the town's harbor. After the Byzantine city of Melite (modern Mdina on Malta) was captured by the Aghlabids in 870, marble from its churches was used to build the Ribat. A soaring structure that combined the purposes of a minaret and a watch tower, it remains in outstanding condition and draws visitors from around the world. Its mosque is sometimes accounted the oldest surviving in the region and the town's main mosque, also built during the 9th century, has a similarly fortress-like appearance.
Susa was briefly occupied by Norman Sicily in the 12th century; it fell to the Ottoman Empire in the 16th; and it was bombarded by a French and Venetian fleet in the 18th.
Medieval Susa was known for its textile industries, producing silk and flax fabrics called Sūsī. Especially renowned were its robes called shuqqas, some of which were mass-produced and sold ready-to-wear throughout the Mediterranean.
After the decline of Mahdia in the 15th and 16th centuries, Susa remained as the most important town in the Sahel region, with a population of about 15,000.

Colonial Sousse
Tunisia became a French protectorate in 1881. Around the end of the 19th century, Sousse had a population of 7,000 and was the second-most-important city in Tunisia after Tunis itself. At this point, the entire population of Sousse lived in the walled medina. The medina was surrounded by agricultural settlements, two of which - Kala Kebira and Msaken - were more densely populated than the city itself. The French Protectorate reinforced Sousse's role as a commercial and administrative center by establishing public buildings, enlarging the city's port, and building railways. Between 1896 and 1911, railways were built connecting Sousse with Tunis, Kairouan, Sfax, Mahdia, Moknin, and Henshir Suwatir. Food industries were also established in the city.
Before the First World War, Sousse had about 25,000 inhabitants, including around 10,000 French and roughly 5,000 other Europeans, mostly Italians and Maltese. The port was the garrison of the 4th Tunisian Rifle Regiment.
The first developments outside the medina walls were begun during this period, but they were home to a relatively small number of people until after the Second World War. Sousse was devastated by the war and suffered 39 bombardments between December 1942 and May 1943. In 1946, after the war was over, the authorities decided to give a high priority to reconstruction efforts in Sousse.

Modern Sousse
When Tunisia became independent in 1956, Sousse was made a wileya capital and it continued to expand in all directions. Over the course of the 20th century, its growth was explosive: from just 8,577 residents in 1885, it had grown to 134,835 residents in 1994. Its physical area had also increased massively, from a compact 29 hectares in 1881 to 3,100 hectares in 1992. The secondary and tertiary sectors of the economy also grew accordingly.
Sousse has retained the Arabian look and feel it assumed in the centuries after its initial conquest. Today it is considered one of the best examples of seaward-facing fortifications built by the Arabs. With a population of about 200,000, Sousse retains a medieval heart of narrow, twisted streets, a kasbah and medina, its ribat fortress and long wall on the Mediterranean. Surrounding it is a modern city of long, straight roads and more widely spaced buildings.
Sousse was the site of the chess interzonal in 1967, made famous when American Grandmaster Bobby Fischer withdrew from the tournament even though he was in first place at the time.
On 26 June 2015, a lone gunman, Seifeddine Rezgui Yacoubi, opened fire on tourists sunbathing on a beach near the Riu Imperial Marhaba and Soviva hotels, killing 38 and wounding 39, before being shot dead by the police.

Cityscape
Demography
As of 2019, Sousse's population was 737,027. Males represent 50.1% of the population structure (with a population of 509,456) against 49.9% by females (with a population of 507,426) in 2014.

Public services
The city contains the University of Sousse, formerly known as the University of the Center, including its Ibn El Jazzar, Faculty of Medicine, the Sousse National School of Engineers, and the Higher Institute of Music of Sousse, founded in 1999.
There are a number of high schools, such as the pilot high school of Sousse, the boys' high school, the Tahar-Sfar high school (formerly the young girls' high school), the 20 – March 1934 high school (technical high school), the Abdelaziz-El-Bahi high school or the Jawhara high school, and colleges, such as the Pilot College of Sousse, the Mohamed El Aroui College and the Constantine College.
Sousse is served by a hospital, the Hospital of Sahloul, the largest in the region.

Economy
Sousse's most important economic activity takes place in the tertiary sector, which employs over 50% of the city's workforce and includes administration, education, healthcare, trade, communications, and banking. Not far behind is the secondary sector, which employs another 45% of the city's workers and includes industries like textiles and leather, construction, chemicals, electronics, and mechanical and electrical components. The small remainder is engaged in the primary sector, mainly fishing. Although smaller than the port in Sfax, Sousse has a port that serves an important commercial outlet for central Tunisia, particularly for the regions around Kairouan and Kasserine.
Sousse is the third largest city in Tunisia after Tunis and Sfax. Although it is associated with olive oil manufacture and has other industries, tourism predominates today. An olive grove covering more than 2,500 km2 (965 sq mi) constitutes one of its main riches since antiquity. The busy port near downtown adds a touch of liveliness to its activity. Sousse also had many oil wells in the area during its colonial period.

Tourism
Sousse is an important tourist resort. It has a hot semi-arid climate, with the seaside location moderating the climate, making it an all-season resort with hot, dry summers and warm, mild, wet winters. The fine sandy beaches are backed by orchards and olive groves.
Only 20 km (12 mi) from Monastir and Monastir Habib Bourguiba International Airport, hotel complexes with a capacity of 40,000 beds extend 20 km (12 mi) from the old city (medina) north along the seafront to Port El Kantaoui. Some 1,200,000 visitors come every year to enjoy its hotels and restaurants, nightclubs, casinos, beaches, and sports facilities.
Sousse is considered a popular tourist destination, especially due to its nightlife. The season traditionally begins at the start of June and finishes on the first weekend of October with the closing parties.

Transport
Sousse is well-connected with the main Tunisian Railways network, having non-electrified lines to Tunis (since 1899), Sfax (since 1911), and Kasserine (since 2004) with diesel multiple unit and locomotive-driven trains. The main Gare Sousse terminus is in the city center, while Gare Kalaa Seghira serves a bypass route.
Since 2010 the electrified Sahel Metro line goes south to Monastir Habib Bourguiba International Airport, Monastir, and Mahdia. This line has the Sousse - Bab Jadid station as its northern terminus in Sousse's city center, and 4 additional stations in the city.
Intercity buses and red-strip microbuses (so-called louages) connect Sousse with many cities in Tunisia. Urban transit in Sousse is served by routes of articulated and conventional buses, blue-strip louages, and cheap taxis. The 600 mm (1 ft 11+5⁄8 in) Sousse–Kairouan Decauville railway operated from 1882 to 1996, before it was regauged to 1,000 mm (3 ft 3+3⁄8 in) gauge.

Sights
Medina
A medina, surrounded by its city walls and fortifications, is of historical interest. The medina includes open and covered bazaars (souks). Buildings of historical interest include the ribat castle, the central mosque, and a historical museum in the Casbah with mosaics from the area's many Roman villas. The Carthaginian catacombs can be visited.
UNESCO declared the medina of Sousse a World Heritage Site in 1988, citing among various things its preservation from modern development.

Port Kantaoui
The Kantaoui Port, is a touristic station in the form of a Port. It was built in 1979 specifically as a tourist center.
The architecture, although modern and dazzlingly white, has been modeled on the more traditional buildings in Tunisia, complete with narrow streets and arches. The hotels that line the beachfront extend from Sousse itself along miles of sparkling clean sea to the harbor of Port El Kantaoui and to the north of the harbor.

Religious buildings
Great Mosque
Located at the entrance to the medina, it was erected by the Aghlabid sovereign Aboul Abbas I (841–856) in 850–851, almost thirty years after the construction of the Ribat of Sousse. This mosque is the most emblematic of a city that became a few years after the reign of Ziadet-Allah I (817–838), the second city of Ifriqiya and the Sahel. Subsequently, the building is enlarged during the reign of Ibrahim II (875–902).

Other religious sights
Bou Ftetah Mosque
Médersa El Zaqqaq
Église Saint-Félix

Sport
Sousse is represented by Étoile Sportive du Sahel, a large multisport club. Football is the city's most popular sport, and ES Sahel has won the Tunisian football championship eleven times and the Tunisian Cup ten times. The team's home ground is Stade Olympique de Sousse. Handball, basketball, and volleyball are also popular.

Climate
Köppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies Sousse's climate as hot semi-arid (BSh) bordering with hot-summer Mediterranean (Csa) and cool semi-arid (BSk).
The highest recorded temperature was 48 °C (118 °F) on 28 August 2007, while the lowest recorded temperature was 4.5 °C (40.1 °F) on 27 December 1993.

Notable people
Ons Jabeur, professional tennis player
Salvius Julianus or Julian the Jurist, a master jurist, public official, and politician who served in the Roman imperial state under four successive emperors.
Primasius of Hadrumetum, Roman bishop and exegete, noted for his Commentary on the Apocalypse
Mohamed Ghannouchi, former prime minister
Hamadi Jebali, former prime minister
Aymen Abdennour, footballer
Makrem Ben Romdhane, basketball player
Dov Alfon, author and journalist
Marcel Dadi, guitarist who died in the TWA accident of 1996.
Zine El Abidine Ben Ali former President
Sleim Ammar, neuropsychiatrist and poet.
Rihab Chaieb, opera singer, mezzosopran

Twin towns – sister cities
Sousse is twinned with:

Gallery
References
Further reading
A New Classical Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography, Mythology, and Geography, New York: Harper & Bros, 1860.
Babelon, Ernest Charles François (1911). "Hadrumetum" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 802–803.
Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Susa (Tunisia)" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 162.
Norie, J.W. (1831), New Piloting Directions for the Mediterranean Sea..., London: J.W. Norie & Co.

External links

Official:

Sousse (Municipalité). "Portail officiel de la municipalité de Sousse" (in French). Archived from the original on 10 January 2012.
Sousse (Municipalité). "Portail officiel de la municipalité de Sousse > Découvrir Sousse > Histoire et Patrimoine" (in French). Archived from the original on 27 August 2011. > 'Sousse Patrimoine Mondial de l'humanité' and 'Sousse dans l'histoire'
Office de la marine marchande et des ports (Tunisia). "Port de Sousse" (in French). Archived from the original on 4 June 2008.
Cultural portal. "Portail de la ville de Sousse" (in French).
General references and travel guides:

 Sousse travel guide from Wikivoyage
Interactive Virtual Tour of Sousse
"Susa (Tunisia)" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). 1911.
Photographs:

Heini. "Pictures of Sousse (fifty-one pictures)".
Photo Gallery of Sousse by a Tourist 2010 Winter


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 885
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%B3%D9%88%D8%B3%D8%A9_(%D8%AA%D9%88%D9%86%D8%B3)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

سوسة، هي مدينة في تونس، عاصمة ولاية سوسة. تقع على بعد 140 كم (87 ميل) جنوب العاصمة تونس، ويبلغ عدد سكان المدينة 271,428 نسمة (إحصاء 2014). تقع سوسة في وسط شرق البلاد، على خليج الحمامات، وهو جزء من البحر الأبيض المتوسط. يعتمد اقتصادها على معدات النقل والأغذية المصنعة وزيت الزيتون والمنسوجات والسياحة وهي موطن لجامعة سوسة.

الموقع الجغرافي
تقع سوسة في الوسط الشرقي للبلاد التونسية. وهي مركز منطقة الساحل التونسي. وتعرف بـ«جوهرة الساحل». والساحل التونسي منطقة تمتد على طول حوالي 170 كم بين بوفيشة والشابة وعرض 25 كم تقريبا بين سوسة وسيدي الهاني وسوسة مدينة ساحلية تشرف على شواطئ البحر الأبيض المتوسط. سواحلها رملية ملائمة للنشاط التجاري البحري ولنشاط صيد الأسماك وللنشاط السياحي. وتتكون تضاريسها من سهول وربى قليلة الارتفاع وأراضيها ملائمة للنشاط الزراعي وتربية الماشية كالغنم والبقر والماعز والدواجن.
مناخها متوسطي معتدل. وكميات الأمطار النازلة فيها تتراوح بين 250 و 400 مم سنويا. وهو مناخ صالح لغراسة الزياتين.
تحيط بالمدينة شبكة عمرانية كثيفة متباعدة بما يقدر بحوالي 5 كيلومترات في المعدل وأكبر المدن المحيطة بها من حيث عدد السكان هي مساكن (مركز معتمدية) والمنستير (مركز ولاية) والمهدية (مركز ولاية) ومدن أخرى كلها مراكز معتمديات كحمام سوسة والقلعة الصغرى والقلعة الكبرى.
تقع سوسة على مسافات غير كبيرة من المدن التونسية الهامة: فتقع على بعد 140 كم جنوب تونس العاصمة و 50 كم شرق القيروان و 20 كم غرب المنستير و 120 كم شمال صفاقس.

تاريخ المدينة
أسسها الفينيقيون في الألف الأولى قبل الميلاد (سنة 1101 ق.م.) وتغير اسمها مرات:

هدروماتوم (Hadrumetum) وهو الاسم الذي عرفت به قديما.
جوستينا وهو اسم الإمبراطور جستنيان الأول الذي احتلها.
سوسة (المحروسة) وهو الاسم الذي استعمله المسلمون، والمرجّح أنه من أصل أمازيغي حيث أنّ عدة أماكن بشمال أفريقيا تحمل نفس الاسم، مثل سوس بالمغرب أو سوسة بليبيا. بقيت سوسة متميزة عبر العصور وهي في الوقت الحاضر مركز إداري وصناعي وتجاري وسياحي وثقافي نشيط لها مكانة متميزة على الصعيدين الداخلي والخارجي.

المناخ الثقافي
الثقافة في العصور الإسلامية:
سوسة مدينة ساحلية نشيطة ثقافيا على مر العصور ومراكز الثقافة فيها في العصور الإسلامية هي:
الكتاتيب وهي المؤسسات التعليمية الأولى ودورها تحفيظ القرآن الكريم ومبادئ اللغة العربية والفقهية.
المسجد الكبير في قلب المدينة ووقع تأسيسه منذ القرن2 هـ وبناه الأغالبة وبقي منارة تعليمية بارزة يقدم إليه الطلاب من كامل بلاد المغرب والأندلس.
المساجد الصغيرة ومنها مسجد أبو فتاتة وهو أقدم مسجد بمدينة سوسة أسس في العهد الأغلبي.
الرباطات وهي عبارة عن أماكن للعبادة ومراقبة السواحل خوفا من إغارة البيزنطيين على السواحل الإسلامية وتتباعد الرباطات بحوالي 5 كيلومترات عن بعضها البعض وتنتشر على طول سواحل بلاد المغرب. وكانت الرباطات تعج بالعلماء والعباد من الرجال وكانوا يداومون على قراءة القرآن والحديث النبوي ويكثرون من التنفل ويضيفون إلى ذلك مراقبة الشواطئ ليلا نهارا. ويتكثف الحضور إلى هذه الأماكن في شهر رمضان. وقد زالت هذه الرباطات في العهد الفاطمي.
المدارس وهي مؤسسة حادثة في الحضارة العربية الإسلامية تطورت بعد القرن الخامس للهجرة/11م
انظر: حسن حسني عبد الوهاب ورقات في الحضارة العربية الإسلامية.
أما في الفترة المعاصرة فقد اكتسبت سوسة من تجربتها الدفينة على المستوى الحضاري والمعرفي لتنجب العديد من الكتاب والشعراء بالإضافة إلى العديد من الجمعيات الثقافية التي تحرص على تركيز وتفعيل العمل الثقافي - المعرفي وتشريك كل الأفراد فيه وكل المؤسسات. وقد شهدت مدينة سوسة انطلاقا من سنة 2009 نشوء نوع جديد من الحراك الثقافي حملته حركة نشيد على عاتقها لتحاول إرساء نهج جديد للعمل الثقافي يقوم أساسا على ركيزتي السلام والمحبّة اللذان إن صُقلا بالمعرفة أنجبا جيلا من الحكماء والإنسانيين.

المؤسسات التربوية
تحتضن المدينة جامعة سوسة (والتي كانت تعرف بجامعة الوسط). وتضم جامعة سوسة العديد من الكليات والمعاهد العليا مثل: كلية الآداب بسوسة، كلية الحقوق، كلية الطبّ، المعهد العالي للفنون الجميلة وغيرها. كما يوجد عدد من المعاهد الثانوية منها: المدرسة الإعدادية النموذجية بالباب الشمالي بسوسة، المعهد النموذجي، معهد محمد معروف (و يعرف أيضا باسم معهد الذكور)، معهد الطاهر صفر (و يعرف أيضا باسم معهد الفتيات)، معهد حيّ الرياض (و يعرف أيضا باسم المعهد الكبير)، معهد 20 مارس، معهد عبد العزيز الباهي، معهد محمد العروي (و يعرف أيضا باسم معهد جوهرة)، و معهد ابن رشد بحي الرياض.

الرياضة
النجم الرياضي الساحلي هو الجمعية الرياضية المسيطرة على منطقة الساحل. تأسٌست في 11 ماي 1925 ومقرها في مدينة سوسة (حاليٌا في شارع محمد القروي). تحتوي الجمعيٌة على ستة فروع وهي كرة القدم والكرة الطائرة وكرة السلة وكرة اليد والجودو والمصارعة. يعتبر فريق كرة القدم في الجمعية من أعرق فرق الدوري التونسي, وكان قد خاض نهائي كأس رابطة الأبطال الإفريقية سنتي 2004 و2005 وفاز بأمجد الكؤوس الأفريقية أمام النادي الأهلي المصري بنتيجة 3 مقابل 1 يوم 9 نوفبر 2007 بملعب القاهرة (أهداف عفوان الغربي وأمين الشرميطي وموسى ناري) كما شارك النجم في كأس العالم للأندية باليابان وفاز على بطل الكونكا كاف نادي باتشوكا المكسيكي بهدف لصفر كان سجّله موسى ناري واحتل المرتبة الرابعة عالميا بعد الخسارة أمام فريق أوراوا راد الياباني بركلات الجزاء.
توجد جمعيات رياضية أخرى في سوسة كالملعب السوسي، والٌذي كان من أبطال كرة القدم التونسية في الستينات، وألعاب القوى السوسي والجمعية النسائية بالساحل الٌذي يعد في صفوفه فريق كرة قدم وكرة يد نسائية جيٌدة والأمل الرياضي بحمام سوسة الذي التحق بالرابطة المحترفة الأولى في موسم 2007 -2008 والهلال الرياضي بمساكن.

شخصيات مهمة من المدينة
أبو جعفر
ابن عمر، يحي بن عمر بن يوسف صاحب كتاب أحكام السوق
حسن أحمد خرباش

الطقس
حسب تصنيف كوبن للمناخ، يصنّف طقس مدينة سوسة بأنه مناخ متوسطي شبه قاحل (BSh).
سجّلت أعلى درجة حرارة في المدينة في 28 آب (أغسطس) 2007، وكانت 48 درجة مئوية، بينما كانت أدنى درجة حرارة صفر مئوي وسجلت بتاريخ 27 كانون الأول (ديسمبر) 1993.


== المراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 4,136
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sousse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sousse (arabe : سوسة, Sūsa, /suːsæ/ ) est une ville portuaire de l'Est de la Tunisie, située à 143 kilomètres au sud de Tunis, et ouverte sur le golfe d'Hammamet (mer Méditerranée).
Capitale du Sahel tunisien — elle est parfois surnommée la « perle du Sahel » — et chef-lieu du gouvernorat du même nom, elle est la troisième municipalité du pays après Tunis et Sfax, et la quatrième agglomération, Nabeul étant la troisième.
La médina de Sousse est inscrite au patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco depuis 1988.

Toponymie
Des noms semblables peuvent être trouvés en Libye et au sud du Maroc, comme avec la région du Souss. Souss en marocain est synonyme de rief, ce qui désigne les nomades ou plus généralement les campagnards. Toutefois, le terme de Sousse est ici attribué à une ville, à l'époque symbole de puissance et de sédentarité.

Géographie
Situation
Sousse occupe un emplacement géographique au centre de la Tunisie, sur le littoral du Sahel donnant sur la mer Méditerranée bordant l'Est du pays.
La ville s'étend sur 45 km2 et se situe à 25 mètres d'altitude.

Administration
La municipalité de Sousse est le chef-lieu d'un gouvernorat qui s'étend sur 2 669 km2. Elle est divisée en quatre arrondissements municipaux : Sousse Nord, Sousse Sud, Sousse Médina et Sousse Riadh. Les deux premiers sont créés le 11 février 1976 et les deux derniers le 19 février 1982. Ses principales circonscriptions et délégations sont au nombre de quatre : Sousse Sidi Abdelhamid, Sousse Médina, Sousse Jawhara et Sousse Riadh.
Son code géographique est le 31.

Démographie
Poids démographique
En 2016, l'aire urbaine de Sousse-Monastir est la seconde du pays et comprend plus d'un million d'habitants.
La population de la municipalité de Sousse atteint 221 530 habitants en 2014 pour une densité de près de 5 000 habitants/km2 alors que son agglomération (Grand Sousse) avoisine les 400 000 habitants en 2004, 690 000 en 2015 puis 710 000 habitants en 2017, ce qui la place en quatrième position des agglomérations du pays.

Statistiques
Le taux de croissance démographique (2,6 %) du Grand Sousse en 2004 est le plus élevé des grandes villes tunisiennes et ce, grâce au pouvoir attractif de la ville, de son littoral et des agglomérations voisines ayant bénéficié notamment de coûts relativement bas des terrains et des loyers pour les migrants tunisiens venus à la recherche d'emplois dans l'aire urbaine et dont le flux s'intensifie à partir des années 2000. Ils occupent principalement des emplois dans le bâtiment (23,8 %) ou dans l'administration, l'éducation, la santé (21,2 %), quand celui des anciens résidents prédomine dans le secteur industriel (29,2 %).
Le taux d'analphabétisme à Sousse est inférieur à 10 %, avec une prépondérance de la population féminine. Le taux d'activité de la population soussienne âgée de plus de quinze ans est supérieur à 50 %. Celui du chômage de la population de Sousse Médina s'élève à 9,5 % en 2014, quand celui de Sousse Jawhara est de 10,2 % avec, dans ces chiffres encore, un taux de chômage supérieur frappant la population féminine. Pour autant, l'ensemble reste inférieur à la moyenne nationale s'élevant à 15,5 % en 2018. Il est à remarquer que, tout sexe confondu, le taux d'emploi est notablement plus élevé parmi les personnes ayant fait des études secondaires par rapport à celles relevant de l'enseignement supérieur.
Par ailleurs, plus de la moitié des ménages est propriétaire de son logement.

Pyramide des âges
Religion
En 2018, 98 % de la population soussienne sont musulmans et 2 % sont chrétiens, juifs ou relevant d'autres religions.

Histoire
Hadrim
Si les Peuples de la mer se sont sans doute fixés antérieurement dans la région de Sousse, c'est aux Phéniciens que l'on attribue le premier nom connu de la ville. Au XIe siècle av. J.-C. apparaît le toponyme Hadrim qui désigne, selon M'hamed Hassine Fantar, un enclos ou un quartier d'habitation. Les vestiges archéologiques du site ne remontent cependant guère au-delà du VIe siècle av. J.-C., période où Hadrim passe sous l'autorité de Carthage et vit avec elle les guerres puniques tout en maintenant une identité phénicienne comme l'attestent notamment les pratiques funéraires locales. Après avoir perdu la bataille de Zama, Hannibal Barca, qui a des propriétés dans les environs de Hadrim, fait effectuer des travaux civils à ses soldats et est à l'origine de la plantation de nombreux oliviers dans la région.

Hadrumète
Hadrim se libère progressivement de la tutelle carthaginoise en établissant des relations économiques et diplomatiques directes avec Rome dont elle prend le parti durant la troisième guerre punique. Après la destruction de Carthage, les Hadrumétins deviennent, selon l'expression d'Appien, les « amis du peuple romain » et la ville, rebaptisée Hadrumète (Hadrumetum), devient une cité romaine privilégiée et libre, et s'enrichit de décorations de l'époque encore visibles aujourd'hui. En 46 av. J.-C., elle perd une partie de ses privilèges et se trouve frappée d'une lourde amende lorsqu'elle choisit le camp des Pompéiens contre le victorieux Jules César.

À la fin du Ier siècle, Hadrumète est la première cité africaine à bénéficier du statut de colonie honoraire qui est attribué par l'empereur Trajan. En reconnaissance, des monuments glorifiant le généreux empereur sont érigés : arc de triomphe, théâtre, amphithéâtre, thermes, etc. La prospérité de la ville culmine au IIIe siècle sous les règnes de la dynastie des Sévères. Le commerce de l'huile d'olive jouit d'un grand essor après que le fondateur de la dynastie a instauré une distribution gratuite et quotidienne d'huile à Rome[réf. souhaitée]. La ville frappe même sa propre monnaie. La ville connaît une période de déclin à la suite de sa participation en 238 à la lutte qui oppose Gordien Ier et son fils Gordien II à Capelianus (de), fidèle à Maximin Ier le Thrace. Des monuments publics et des villas sont rasés et le port autrefois si actif perd de son importance.
La cité retrouve une prospérité relative lorsqu'en 297 l'empereur Dioclétien fait de Hadrumète la capitale de la nouvelle province de Byzacène qui s'étend sur le centre du pays.

Hunericopolis et Justinianapolis
Quand en 439 les Vandales chassent les Romains et détruisent l'enceinte de la ville, Hadrumète prend le nom de Hunéricopolis tiré du nom de Hunéric (fils du chef vandale Genséric). Elle végète pendant un siècle avant sa destruction par des pillards venus du sud du pays et ce peu avant l'arrivée des troupes byzantines. Le port, complètement ensablé, est remis en état par l'empereur byzantin Justinien dont la ville prend le nom en 535 (Justinianopolis) et devient le chef-lieu de l'une des sept provinces du diocèse d'Afrique. La période byzantine dure environ 135 ans.

Sousse
Débuts de l'islam
Le début de la période arabo-musulmane peut être fixé à 670, lorsqu'Oqba Ibn Nafi al-Fihri assiège la ville qui prend le nom de Sousse. Elle est d'abord une agglomération pourvue en 787 d'un ribat et habitée essentiellement par des ascètes chargés de la défense des côtes. Le nouvel essor de Sousse vient du second prince aghlabide Ziadet-Allah Ier qui dote la ville d'un chantier naval (821) d'où partent les navires à la conquête de la Sardaigne (821), de Malte, de la Sicile (827) ou de Rome (846).
Au IXe siècle, la ville s'est ouverte et accueille des musulmans, des chrétiens et des juifs. Elle devient alors la seconde ville de l'Ifriqiya et la première du Sahel. Durant la période fatimide, la prospérité de Sousse ne souffre que modérément de la fondation de Mahdia. La ville, qui exporte ses étoffes en Orient et en Occident, est aussi une prospère cité oléicole.

Moyen Âge
Jusqu'en 1159, Sousse subit les assauts puis l'occupation des Normands de Sicile qui la conquièrent en 1148. Mais sa décadence, à partir du XIIe siècle, est surtout due à la promotion de Tunis comme capitale sous le règne des Hafsides, à l'appauvrissement de l'arrière-pays dont elle constitue le débouché maritime et, au XIIIe siècle, à la concurrence des textiles exportés depuis l'Europe, période durant laquelle des Génois s'installent à Sousse. 
La ville subit une courte occupation espagnole entre 1537 et 1574. Pendant l'époque ottomane (1574-1881), la ville retrouve son importance. Sousse est alors, au XVIIe siècle, le deuxième port de commerce du pays.

Époque moderne
Aux brodeurs et tisserands s'ajoutent des artisans potiers qui exportent leur production dans tout le bassin méditerranéen. À la fin du XVIIIe siècle, la ville souffre des bombardements français (1770) et vénitiens (1784 et 1786). La ville s'enfonce dans le déclin après 1864 lorsqu'elle se range contre Sadok Bey dans une insurrection antifiscale. 
Elle passe, comme toute la Tunisie, sous le protectorat français à partir de 1881. La création d'un nouveau port (1884) lui redonne toutefois son rôle de débouché maritime des produits de la steppe. La municipalité de Sousse est instituée le 16 juillet 1884.
À partir de ces dates de la fin du XIXe siècle, Sousse voit l'arrivée et l'installation de nombre d'Européens, particulièrement d'origine française et italienne, qui devront quitter le pays après notamment son accession à l'indépendance.

Le 26 juin 2015, un attentat terroriste islamiste survient dans la station balnéaire voisine de Port El-Kantaoui située au Nord-ouest de la ville. Perpétré par Seifeddine Rezgui et revendiqué par l'organisation État islamique, il fait 39 morts et 39 blessés. Il choque l'opinion publique par le nombre élevé de victimes, d'autant qu'il constitue la pire attaque dans l'histoire récente de la Tunisie.

Architecture et urbanisme
Le flanc oriental de la médina est complété par un port agrandi à partir de 1899. Plus au nord s'étend la ville nouvelle construite sous le protectorat français et caractérisée par ses larges rues rectilignes et sa promenade dominant la mer où s'alignent les hôtels en direction de Port El-Kantaoui.

Médina
La médina de Sousse, tout comme celle de Tunis, est classée au patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco (inscrite en 1988). L'un des éléments qui la distinguent est l'emplacement de la principale mosquée qui n'est pas au centre de la ville. Comme le ribat, elle était chargée de protéger le bassin artificiel de l'arsenal, ce qui explique son allure militaire.

Le ribat a vu le jour durant le règne de la dynastie des Aghlabides (821) mais, après l'édification des murs de la ville en 859, perdit peu à peu sa fonction militaire. Alors qu'à l'étage se trouve une petite mosquée, le sous-sol est aménagé en divers locaux et magasins alors que des traces d'une presse à olives subsistent. L'imposante entrée flanquée de deux piliers de style corinthien est conçue comme une double porte, ce qui permettait de bloquer l'accès à la forteresse. Quant à la kasbah, elle se situe dans la partie la plus haute de la médina et date de l'année 844.
En 853, un phare de 30 mètres de haut est baptisé du nom d'un eunuque du souverain aghlabide Ziadet-Allah Ier (Khalaf El Fatâ). C'est dans ses murs qu'est logé le musée archéologique de Sousse depuis 1951.

Remparts et portes
Les remparts, flanqués de tours carrées ou barlongues, se déploient tout autour de la médina. Les pierres sont posées en assises horizontales avec intercalation de joints et, à certains endroits, en opus africanum. Intégrant la kasbah du côté occidental, ils sont couronnés de merlons arrondis et percés par plusieurs entrées à arcs brisés et outrepassés, reposant sur des pieds-droits et inscrites dans un cadre rectangulaire paré de pierres ; un chemin de ronde en occupe la partie supérieure.
Les murs du côté de la porte de Bab El Bhar se caractérisent par la présence dans leur partie supérieure de deux séries d'arcades voûtées et superposées, ouvertes sur l'intérieur de la ville et se prolongeant sur une vingtaine de mètres.

Édifices religieux
Grande Mosquée
D'après l'inscription figurant à l'intérieur de la façade en style kufi, la Grande Mosquée aurait été bâtie autour de l'an 236 de l'hégire (soit entre 850 et 851) par le souverain aghlabide Aboul Abbas Ier. La salle de prière a été agrandie en trois étapes entre 894 et 897 en direction du mur de la qibla. Le pavillon coiffé d'une coupole situé à l'angle nord du bâtiment et qui tient lieu de minaret est un ajout ultérieur, contrairement à l'opinion de Creswell, de la première moitié du Xe siècle. En effet, cette coupole est déjà mentionnée dans la biographie du juge soussien El Hassan Ben Nasr El Soussî, mort en 952 : « À la période du marché annuel, lorsque les Kairouanais venaient au ribat, il [le juge] avait l'habitude de s'asseoir sous la coupole (kouba) de la Grande Mosquée de Sousse à partir de laquelle on appelait à la prière et d'où on dominait les portes permettant l'accès à la mer. Lorsqu'il voyait un homme venir avec un jeune à ses côtés, il le laissait venir. Si le jeune était avec son père ou un autre parent, il le laissait passer. Quand il [le juge] suspectait [l'homosexualité], il l'arrêtait de disposer librement du garçon. »

Mosquée Bou Ftata
La plus ancienne mosquée de la ville se trouve à proximité de la porte sud, plus précisément à la lisière des souks. La mosquée Bou Ftata bâtie entre 838 et 841 porte la plus ancienne inscription sacrée de style kufi en Afrique du Nord sur la façade du bâtiment. Selon la tradition suivie par le souverain aghlabide Aboul Affan, cette petite mosquée mesure seulement huit mètres de côté et porte le nom de l'affranchi Bou Ftata.

Médersa El Zaqqaq
À proximité de la Grande Mosquée, dans la rue de Sicile où les quartiers résidentiels de la médina rencontrent les souks, se trouve la médersa El Zaqqaq qui est flanquée de sa propre mosquée surmontée d'un minaret de style turc. Selon la tradition locale, cette ancienne école porterait le nom de l'érudit marocain Ali ibn Kasim El Zaqqaq (mort en 1506 à Fès). Il est cependant probable que son nom provienne de celui d'un érudit local moins connu, Abou Jaafar Ahmed El Zaqqaq, qui vécut à la fin du IXe siècle.
Les élèves étaient logés dans les petits bâtiments de l'école et y étudiaient le Coran, la grammaire et la rhétorique. À l'origine, il s'agissait sans doute d'une maison privée qui, sous le règne des Hafsides, fut transformée en école.

Synagogue Keter Torah
La synagogue Keter Torah, construite en centre-ville en 1913 et fondée par Yossef Guez, rabbin de Sousse de 1906 à 1928, devenu premier grand-rabbin autochtone de Tunisie de 1928 à 1934 sous le protectorat français, est la dernière synagogue de la ville, où l'importance de la communauté juive s'est considérablement réduite à la suite de la Seconde Guerre mondiale puis de la création d'Israël, de l'indépendance de la Tunisie ou de la guerre des Six Jours.
De cette communauté installée à Sousse depuis le VIIe siècle, et qui comptait 4 800 membres en 1921 puis 3 530 en 1946, il ne reste plus que 36 individus en mai 2006. La municipalité rend hommage au dévouement de certains de ses Juifs de Sousse en septembre 2018, en attribuant le nom de leurs notables à plusieurs rues de la ville.

Église Saint-Félix
Construite en 1911 à la place d'une église devenue trop petite de par l'accroissement de la population catholique, principalement d'origine française et italienne, l'église Saint-Félix est restaurée dans les années 1990 ; elle est victime d'une tentative d'incendie en 2011. Elle sert aussi de lieux de culte protestant et évangélique.
Il exista aussi dans le passé l'église Saint-Joseph, l'église Notre-Dame-de-l'Immaculée-Conception et l'église Sainte-Jeanne-d'Arc qui ont disparu après l'indépendance du pays puis le départ de la population non-musulmane.

Culture
Musée et catacombes
Situé dans la kasbah, le musée archéologique, créé en 1951, possède la deuxième collection de mosaïques après celle du musée national du Bardo. À l'ouest de la ville, les catacombes forment un labyrinthe de 240 galeries souterraines se déployant sur cinq kilomètres et contenant 15 000 sépultures.
Le musée, comme les catacombes, sont l'objet de l'attention de la Société archéologique de Sousse depuis sa création en 1903.

Enseignement
La ville abrite l'université de Sousse, anciennement connue comme l'université du Centre, avec notamment sa faculté de médecine Ibn El Jazzar et l'École nationale d'ingénieurs de Sousse, ainsi que l'Institut supérieur de musique de Sousse fondé en 1999.
On note aussi la présence d'un certain nombre de lycées, tels que le lycée pilote de Sousse, le lycée de garçons, le lycée Tahar-Sfar (anciennement lycée de jeunes filles), le lycée 2-Mars 1934 (lycée technique), le lycée Abdelaziz-El-Bahi ou le lycée Jawhara, et des collèges, tels que le Collège pilote de Sousse, le Collège Mohamed El Aroui ou le Collège Constantine.

Dialecte
Le dialecte soussien présente les caractéristiques du dialecte parlé dans l'ensemble du Sahel tunisien, le mot le plus caractéristique étant le pronom de la première personne du singulier eni. Cependant, il existe quelques spécificités locales, surtout au niveau de l'accent plus aigu, avec une accentuation de la prononciation du i. Quelques mots sont prononcés exclusivement par les Soussiens comme yahbenni, qui exprime la stupeur ou la surprise, le mot chichma qui signifie « robinet » alors que dans le reste du pays, on utilise le mot sabéla, et le mot chlaka qui signifie « pantoufles » alors que les autres Tunisiens l'appellent chléka.

Festivals et événements
La saison culturelle est marquée, chaque 24 juillet, veille de la fête de la République, par le carnaval d'Aoussou. Longeant la plage et remontant l'avenue Habib-Bourguiba en direction de la médina, des chars symbolisant l'environnement, l'enseignement ou encore les communications défilent aux côtés de troupes folkloriques tunisiennes et étrangères.

Santé
La ville de Sousse est desservie par plusieurs établissements sanitaires publics, tels que les hôpitaux Sahloul et Farhat-Hached, fondé en 1942, et privés, comme la clinique El Yosr Internationale.

Politique
Municipalité
La municipalité de Sousse est créée le 16 juillet 1884, tandis que le premier conseil municipal est composé le 25 juillet de la même année. Le 16 mai 1957, Ahmed Noureddine devient le premier maire de la ville après l'indépendance.

Élections municipales
À la suite des élections municipales de 2018, Taoufik Laaribi (Nidaa Tounes) est élu maire. Après sa démission, Mohamed Ikbel Khaled, appartenant à une liste indépendante dénommée « Sousse pour tous », est élu.

Économie
Secteurs
L'économie de la « capitale du Sahel » repose principalement sur l'activité industrielle, ses usines fabriquant essentiellement du matériel de transport, des textiles et des produits agroalimentaires (en particulier des sardines en boîte et de l'huile d'olive). C'est à Sousse, à la fin du XIXe siècle, que les premières presses à vapeur destinées à la production d'huile d'olive, furent mises en œuvre en Tunisie.
Le marché agricole du Sahel (oliveraies) et le tourisme — notamment grâce à sa position centrale par rapport à de nombreux sites historiques ou balnéaires comme Port El-Kantaoui, Monastir, Hammamet, El Jem et Kairouan — représentent une autre part de l'économie locale. Pôle touristique sur lequel repose une notable partie de son économie, Sousse compte nombre d'hôtels de différentes catégories.

Port
La ville de Sousse bénéficie d'un important port de pêche et de commerce.

Tourisme
Ces dernières décennies, la ville de Sousse est devenue une destination de choix pour les touristes du monde entier de par la richesse de son patrimoine culturel, outre les atouts de sa station balnéaire, ses terrasses ombragées, ses plages au sable fin ou la douceur de son climat, mais aussi par son excellent rapport qualité-prix.
Pour ce faire, elle offre plusieurs types d'hébergement avec une centaine d'hôtels de plusieurs catégories dont près de la moitié en 4 et 5 étoiles. Construits sur la plage, la plupart des hôtels de Sousse bénéficient de parcs aquatiques, de piscines et de jardins. Néanmoins, depuis la révolution de 2010-2011, une partie des établissements a fermé et le secteur est partiellement en berne à la suite des attentats ayant frappé les touristes de la ville et ceux du musée du Bardo en 2015. Il repart à la hausse l'année suivante.

Transports
Transport en commun
La Société de transport du Sahel (STS) est la seule société offrant un service de transport en commun en bus. La ville de Sousse est reliée aux villes environnantes par un réseau de louages et de taxis qui ne cesse de se développer pour assurer la fluidité de la circulation des personnes.
La ville de Sousse est desservie par une ligne de chemin de fer régional, le Métro du Sahel, la reliant à Monastir et Mahdia, sur une longueur totale de 97 kilomètres. Un projet de trois lignes supplémentaires devant rallier Kalâa Kebira, Enfida, Kalâa Seghira et M'saken pour un coût de 500 millions de dinars est approuvé en juillet 2019 par une délégation spéciale du conseil régional du gouvernorat de Sousse.

Transport aérien
De l'étranger, on accède à Sousse par avion (aéroports de Monastir et Enfida pour les plus proches ou de l'Aéroport international de Tunis-Carthage), par ferry et bateau à partir des grandes villes portuaires françaises de Toulon ou Marseille via Tunis, et directement de celles d'Italie comme Trapani ou Pantelleria.

Transport ferroviaire
La ville de Sousse est un arrêt sur la ligne de Tunis à Gabès et le point de départ d'une ligne menant à Kalâa Seghira. Une réouverture de la ligne vers Kasserine, construite en 1909 et fermée en 1982, est prévue pour 2026 pour des travaux estimés à 550 millions de dinars.

Sport
Étoile sportive du Sahel
Historique
L'Étoile sportive du Sahel (ESS) est le club omnisports de référence de la région du Sahel. Fondée le 11 mai 1925 et présidée par Chedly Boujemla puis par Ali Larbi Hannachi ; elle est autorisée par arrêté ministériel le 17 juillet de la même année. La tenue de ses joueurs est à l'époque composée d'une « culotte blanche et un maillot rouge avec col et revers blancs et étoile blanche sur la poitrine ».
L'ESS est alors le seul club de Sousse composé uniquement de musulmans face aux clubs mixtes des Français de la Patriote de Sousse (fondé en 1903, dans lequel Francis Borelli a joué), des Juifs du Maccabi de Sousse, des Italiens de La Savoia et des Maltais du Red Star. 
Le club s'entraîne sur le stade Charles-Henri-Cachelou (inauguré en 1922), du nom du juge de paix français et fondateur de la Patriote de Sousse — qui l'a utilisé originellement — avant d'être rebaptisé « stade M'hamed-Maârouf » (cinquième président de l'ESS) après l'indépendance du pays. L'équipe remporte de nombreux trophées dans la première moitié du XXe siècle, notamment grâce au buteur Habib Mougou (1927-2008), surnommé « tête d'or ».

Activités
L'ESS est actuellement basée sur l'avenue Mohamed-Karoui à Sousse ; elle comporte six sections de football, volley-ball, basket-ball, handball, judo et lutte. Son équipe de football est l'une des plus prestigieuses du championnat national et joue au stade olympique. Elle est finaliste de la Ligue des champions de la CAF en 2004 et 2005 et vainqueur de cette même compétition en 2007.

Autres associations
Il existe d'autres associations sportives de Sousse telles que le Stade soussien, une ancienne gloire du football national dans les années 1960, l'Athletic Club de Sousse ou encore la Patriote de Sousse (doyen des clubs tunisiens), sans oublier l'Association sportive féminine du Sahel qui possède des équipes de handball et de football.

Jumelages
La ville de Sousse a développé des relations de coopération avec des villes de plusieurs continents via l'établissement de relations de jumelage :

 Thiès (Sénégal) depuis le 20 novembre 1965
 Ljubljana (Slovénie) depuis le 27 juillet 1967
 Poděbrady (Tchéquie) depuis le 17 mai 1969
 Boulogne-Billancourt (France) depuis le 12 juillet 1977
 Brunswick (Allemagne) depuis le 10 septembre 1980
 Marrakech (Maroc) depuis le 17 novembre 1982
 Constantine (Algérie) depuis le 9 juin 1984
 Atar (Mauritanie) depuis le 29 juillet 1989
 Miami (États-Unis) depuis le 10 mai 1994
 Salalah (Oman) depuis le 20 juin 1994
 Lattaquié (Syrie) depuis le 29 juin 1995
 Izmir (Turquie) depuis le 15 mai 2006
 Weihai (Chine) depuis le 25 août 2007
 Nice (France) depuis le 9 février 2012

Personnalités
Notes et références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
Ameur Baâziz et Slah Eddine Ayachi, Si Sousse m'était contée : mémoire d'une ville de 3 000 ans, Sousse, IRIS, 2018.
Ahmed El Bahi, Sousse et le Sahel à l'époque médiévale, Tunis, Centre de publication universitaire, 2004.
Néji Jalloul, Sousse, l'antique Hadrumetum, Sousse, Contraste, 2006.
Anouar El Fani, Sousse, mémoire de médina, Tunis, Sagittaire Éditions, 2007.
Louis Foucher, Hadrumetum, Paris, Presses universitaires de France, 1964.
Kamel Jerfel, Les communautés européennes au temps de la colonisation française : la ville de Sousse, 1881-1939, Sousse, Faculté des lettres et des sciences humaines de Sousse, 2001.
Alexandre Lézine, Sousse, les monuments musulmans, Tunis, Cérès Productions, 1968.
Collectif, À la recherche de Sousse d'antan, Sousse, Société archéologique de Sousse, 1984.

Liens externes

Site officiel
Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire 
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online 
Ressource relative à la musique : MusicBrainz  

(ar) « Site officiel de la municipalité de Sousse », sur commune-sousse.gov.tn (consulté le 10 novembre 2018).

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail de la mer Méditerranée


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 3,270
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Sousse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Sousse (سوسة Susa) is one of the older cities in Tunisia, possessing an authentic medina, which has been declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

## Understand
Located on the coast, it has good beaches and a clear turquoise sea. It is a popular tourist destination, particularly with Russians, Serbs, Croats, British, Germans and East European people.
You will be surprised to see many empty hotels and hotel clubs (permanently closed) along the beach front north of the centre. However, Medina and beach areas are still lively.

## Climate
Its climate is classified as hot semi-arid (BSh) but is close to hot-summer Mediterranean (Csa). Rainfall is mainly in colder months.

## By plane
The most convenient airport is Monastir MIR IATA which is to the south on the coast, 20 minutes away and frequently used by holiday charter flights.
36.07583310.4386111 Enfidha–Hammamet Airport (NBE  IATA) (located in the outskirts of the Enfidha city).

## By train
Sousse is on the main line from Tunis in the north down to Sfax and Monastir to the south. Since it sits at the railway network's center, it is well placed to reach most of the rest of the network, even as far south as Gabes on the coast and Tozeur on the edge of the Sahara . Example fares from Tunis to Sousse are 10.3/7.6 DT in 1st/2nd class. The main train station is directly north of the Medina (~5-10min walking). Tunisian railways are mainly for goods traffic with passenger traffic taking something of a back seat so don't expect to find yourself rattling along at 100 mph; 50 to 60 mph is more likely and the standard of the rolling stock (carriages) can be poor. That said rail services are generally reliable and above all are very cheap, even for the top class (Grand Classe Confort). They can be an excellent way to get about the country, just don't expect Pullman style travel. The national railway company, SNCFT has a workable website that includes timetables and fares. See also Tunisia#Get around for a map showing Tunisian rail network.
35.83044510.6362812 Gare Sousse. The main train station.    (updated Dec 2018)
35.82210910.5692533 Gare Kalâa Seghira, Kalâa Seghira town. It serves the trains avoiding centre.    (updated Dec 2018)

## By car
Highway A1 connects Sousse with Tunis. A toll applies for using the highway. Additionally, Sousse is crossed by National Road 1 (RN1), connecting the city with the south of the country, and Libya. Roads are in very good condition. Additionally, a car ferry connects Sousse with Trapani in Italy once a week i the summer months.

## By bus
Buses connect the city with most other parts of Tunisia. The far bus station (Gare Routière) is in some distance to the west of the Medina at the Souk El Ahad ("Camel Market") - the local bus station is next to the Medina in the town center. Prices are slightly lower than those of second class train tickets, but many buses do not have air conditioning.

## By louage
Louages (shared-taxi) connect Sousse with other cities and towns in Tunisia. The louage station is to the south of the Medina (~30 minutes walking) on Rue El Masjed El Aksa. Louages run frequently to and from Tunis Moncef Bey louage station (11.9 DT, ~1½ hours) from this point. The louage station is well-signed compared to other louage stations and prices are posted by the ticket booths to various cities and towns in Tunisia. Other destinations include Sfax (11.9 DT), Gabes (19.5 DT), Djerba (30.8 DT) and Monastir (2.1 DT).

## By boat
Car ferries and express boats connect Sousse with Trapani (only in the summer months, once a week for cars and passengers) and Mazara del Vallo via Pantelleria 3 times a week, only for passengers. It takes up to 7-8 hours to Trapani and 5 hours to Mazara del Vallo. Private boats and yachts can use the marina at Port El Kantaoui (a resort about 12 km north of Sousse).

## Get around
Taxis in Sousse have a bad reputation and the best advice is to agree a price before getting in and ensure that the price is not 'per person'. If you are unsure of what a reasonable price should be ask at your hotel reception. The taxis do have meters, but the drivers are often reluctant to use them; be firm and insist it is reset to the 0.500  dinar "standing charge" at the start of your journey. One favourite trick is to leave the previous fare on the meter so that it will be added to your fare before you even set off. Always check that the meter has been reset before setting off and that it is on the correct setting for the time of day. Between 21:00 and 05:00 rates are higher than daytime rates at 0.510 DT/km. However, many drivers have altered their meters, and use "special rates" for tourists. A typical daytime fare between Sousse and Port El Kantaoui, with a proper meter, is about 4.100 DT, but, in most cases, with a "special rate" on the meter, the fare will be about 7 DT. You can, however, agree the fare before getting in the taxi. Expect to pay about 5-6 DT if you do. Taxis are yellow, and have a taxi license sticker on the windshield.
In August 2016, as a single voyager, no problems were encountered with taxis here; all taxis taken used their meters straightaway and did not attempt to play with the rates. - Can not confirm this for April 2019 though.
Shared taxis (louages) are large cars or minibuses/people carriers which start their journey when they are full. Well used by the locals, expect to pay 10% of the price of a taxi. Shared taxis can take you further than regular taxis, connecting the city with most bigger towns in Tunisia. Shared taxis for destinations in the same or a closely adjacent city (e.g. Hergla, Chott Mariem) are also yellow with a blue stripe on the middle of the taxi. Shared taxis between cities (far connections) are white with a red stripe. In Sousse, there are also white taxis with red, black, blue and yellow stripes serving destinations in the greater Sousse area (e.g. Akouda, Hammam-Sousse, Port El Kantaoui, Chott Mariem). They leave from the "Station Louage" which is best reached by normal taxi (see above).
Light rail connects central Sousse by the medina (35.8230410.641574 Station Sousse Bab Jdid) to Mahdia via Monastir. It stops along the way in various neighborhoods in southern Sousse and the Monastir MIR IATA airport (Station Aeroport Skanes Monastir). Tickets cost 1 DT from Sousse to Monastir.
Tuk-Tuk's and Mini-trains can get you a fun ride to Port El Kantaoui, which is about 12 km away. They are open, shared transports and start their journey when they're full (or almost). Expect to pay 2 DT per journey at the first and 2.5 DT at the latter. Tuk-tuks are bright purple.
Horse-drawn carriages provide another option for a fun ride to Port El Kantaoui at no more than double the price of a taxi (if you bargain).

## See
All of Sousse's main sights are located within the labyrinthine medina in the heart of the city. Walk around and get lost in the western residential areas, which have beautiful surprises. There are signboards with a "cultural walk" marked out that you could follow. Up on the western side, the medina goes unto higher ground and you can see the sea.
35.82688110.6396991 Grand Mosque of Sousse (Visitor entrance is on the square at the north side of the mosque. Ask the person sitting next to the door or at the ticket booth at the other side of the square.). 8:00 - 14:00. A surprisingly tranquil place despite its location in the middle of the city. Built c. 850 AD, this mosque is simple and austere in the Aghlabite style, no decoration whatsoever aside from a string of angular Arabic and curved arches. Even the prayer room is covered in reed mats instead of the usual carpet. You must be properly dressed to enter, but traditional dress is available for covering up. 5 DT.      (updated Apr 2022)
35.82769310.6387082 Sousse Ribat (Via the square north of the mosque.). 8:00-17:30, and 8:00-19:00 during summer. Whilst not as impressive or extensive as the Ribat in Monastir this fortified holy site is a worthwhile visit and served as home to a branch of Islamic warriors very similar in nature and creed as the Hospitaller Knights that lived in Rhodes. Climbing to the top of the watch tower affords you fantastic views over the Medina. 8 DT.      (updated Apr 2022)
35.82194410.6352783 [formerly dead link]  Sousse Archaeological Museum (Southwest within the old town walls. Entrance is from outside the city walls; no entrance from within.). 9:00-17:00, and it closes 2 hr later during summer. In the gently crumbling old Kasbah on the south-western edge of the Medina. Contains a large collection of mosaics second to the Bardo and other archaeologic artifacts from Roman times. 10 DT.      (updated Apr 2022)
35.82710910.6354944 Musee Dar Essid, Boulevard Yahia Ibn Omar. 10:00–18:00, and it closes 1 hr later during summer. Extremely charming little museum located just within the old city walls. Approaching the Ribat from Hotel de Paris along the north wall, follow signs for Musee Dar Essid. It was the home of a long standing Tunisian family that has now become a museum with the passing of the last family member. The property centers on an open courtyard from which access to all the rooms can be gained, including bedrooms for the first and second wife and, in turn, to the children's rooms. All are delightfully fully furnished, with some curtains dating back 200 years, and with German clocks imported from the 1800s. The house is complete with a tower, which was used to watch the stars for the onset of Ramadan, from which views over Sousse can be gained - it is higher than the Ribat. There is also a small cafe area with great views. A must see! 5 DT, 1 DT for photo rights.      (updated Apr 2022)
35.81812410.6264665 The Sousse Catacombs. Closed for reconstruction since 2016. An underground Christian necropolis created in the 1st century. It stretches over 5 km and contains more than 10.000 graves.     (updated Dec 2018)
35.8329810.6324486 Eglise St Felix.    (updated Dec 2018)
35.83247810.6397227 Synagogue Keter Torah.    (updated Dec 2018)

## Do
Play golf. There is no golf course in Sousse, but one in Port El Kantaoui and two in Monastir.
Walking around the fishing boats at the port is a pleasant way to spend time, and families with children may wish to take a trip on one of the 'pirate' ships which offer fishing and other nautical activities.

## Buy
Don't expect to have language issues as merchants speak almost anything common (French, English, Spanish, German...) - you can mix all languages if you want.
Medina including the souk located in the center of the city. The old section of the city containing the local bazaar, expect to haggle or bargain.
Soula Centre just outside the souk has fixed prices, it is useful to establish values before bargaining in the souk (of course there is no fun).
Everything is pretty cheap, but merchants won't hesitate to quote outrageous prices, so haggling is necessary.  Take it all light-heartedly though and have fun whilst haggling. Obviously, there is a large quantity of counterfeit designer goods available in the Medina.
Don't waste your and their time if you don't intend to buy anything and if you are only interested in taking a look, make it clear from the beginning. Say nicely and with a smile that you are not interested or that you don't have any money left. However don't feel obliged to buy if you can't agree a price.
Don't keep thinking about the price after you buy something. Think on the good deal that you have made and the price that you would've paid in your home country.

## Eat
You can have a nice meal for around 10 DT or less (depends on the place), but prices are generally low. For this you don't have to negotiate prices.

## Budget
Hôtel Gabes, 12 Rue de Paris (In the Medina). Very spartan rooms but good location and trustworthy staff. A lot of negative reviews. 10 DT for a single room, 16 DT for double. (updated Dec 2018)
35.82805410.6398071 Hotel de Paris. Spotlessly clean if rather austere hotel near the main entrance to the medina. Singles from 50 DT (June 2025).    (updated Dec 2018)

## Mid-range
35.83268510.6406672 Abou Nawas Boujaafar Hotel, Avenue Habib Bourguiba, ☏ +216 73 226 030. Great food and services. Thalasso center with an interior (30 °C, salt water) pool, another outside and private beach. 3 restaurants. Deco from the 1980s but not expensive. 5 minutes away from the medina and near all transportations.

## Drink
Drinking tap water is generally not harmful - some people and almost all tourists prefer, though, to use the bottled water that you can find everywhere (very cheap, for around 0.200-0.400 DT per 1/2 liter, 0.300-0.650 DT for 1.5 liter). Non-carbonated (non-sparkling) water is the most popular, and is called "mineral water". Carbonated water is available as well, but you must specifically ask for water with gas (eau avec gaz) or Garci (the most popular brand).
Expect to find a Coke for around 0.800 to 1.5 DT (depends if in a supermarket or hotel).
The favorite beverage of the locals is tea, with many tea based specialties being available at the many cafes and restaurants around town. A favorite amongst locals is the au menthe (tea with mint leaves and sugar) and the aux ammandes (tea with crushed almonds and almond essence). Most locals will drink it while smoking from the chicha (the local name for a hookah). Expect to be offered tea while buying things of relatively high value (over 60-70 DT) from shops in the souk.
Being a city in a Muslim country, alcohol may be rather hard to find and quite expensive, because of little demand. Some cafes and stores will sell wine and beer, since many locals also drink these beverages. Expect to pay 2-3 DT for a 0.3 bottle of local beer (invariably Celtia brand), and 2-12 DT for a bottle of local wine in a store (double in a bar). Hard alcohol is very hard to find and extremely expensive (more expensive than even in the Nordic Countries), since most locals avoid it. Your best bets are hotel bars (3-6 DT for 50 ml of vodka or gin) and Magasin General supermarkets (state owned stores, the only ones authorized to sell hard liquor - one is located on 7 November avenue, near the Sousse Palace hotel). A bottle of gin or whiskey is about 80-120 DT. No alcohol is sold on Fridays.
Sousse is one of few places in Tunisia with somewhat animated nightlife (mostly during high season though). There are 2 kinds of places: normal bars, clubs, discos (upscale) and dodgy cabarets (low scale). The last ones are local oriented (music and crowd), and though might represent some interest as a phenomenon, are often frequented by hustlers, which, mixed with a cheap beer, tend to end up in arguments and mass fights (quickly resolved however). Many bars and discos are located in hotels, though most famous ones are standalone venues.
Living/Banana/Saloon disco. Free entrance, 5 DT beer, party time 0:00 - 04:00 everyday. Conveniently located in Sousse hotel zone near Samara hotel and Movenpick, these venues although themed differently (ambiance and music), share the same positioning ("VIP") and owner ("Bora-Bora" open air disco). More chilled touristic crowd; dress smart.
Be One/B1 club disco. Free entrance, 5 DT beer, party time 0:00 - 04:00 everyday. Located in Port Kantaoui near Houria Palace hotel and Vincci Resort. A sophisticated venue with nice relaxed and partying more Tunisian crowd, European and Arabic dance music, lots of couches, 2 bars, dancefloor and a high platform for cheeky girls to dance in the middle. In low seasons tends to get crowded by 02:00. Dress smart.
Edge bar. 4 DT beer, party time 23:00 - 02:00 everyday. Located in Cesar Palace hotel between Sousse and Port Kantaoui, Avenue 14 Janvier, near Les Oliviers. One of the many hotel bars (with separate entrance), this one though is somewhat classy with nice and relevant (4 stars hotel) more Tunisian crowd, mixed European and Arabic music. A good place for pre-party on your way to B1. Dress normal.

## Sleep
Don't compare the category directly to European hotels, expect to take a star (or even two) from these hotels.

## Stay safe
A terrorist attack at the end of June 2015 killed 38 mostly British tourists.  The UK government still recommends against all but essential travel to Tunisia as a whole, though it has no stronger warning against travel to Sousse as of August 2016.
There's no danger from street crime from walking alone at any time. Most streets are very busy till late night. Respect the locals and you will be respected. Crime is nearly non-existent, even if some of the neighborhoods of the city may look shabby or feel dangerous.
Expect some hassle in the souk (medina) and this is most normal. Merchants always try to show their goods/shops and see what you like. You have to get into the spirit to enjoy, always be nice and have a smile on your face. Even if sometimes annoying, this is absolutely not dangerous.
Women may want to avoid the red light area in the north west of the medina, reached through two overlapping walls which screen that street from the rest of the medina. Single women walking alone may be stared at, but, again, this is not dangerous, but rather a curiosity of some local men.
Most people who come up and speak English to you in the streets will be hoping to sell you something, no risk but end the conversation quickly to avoid them getting indignant when you don't buy, a simple 'non, merci' should suffice.

## Go next
El Jem — with its Roman Amphitheatre, approx 70 km due south of Sousse which is preserved arguably better than that at Rome. It was the location for some of the filming in Gladiator. A UNESCO World Heritage site.
Kairouan — an important centre of Islamic pilgrimage and history, west of Sousse. A UNESCO World Heritage site.
Monastir — beaches and the largest Ribat in the Maghreb.
Port El Kantaoui — purposely built tourist resort featuring a marina. Said to be both fake and 'touristy', nonetheless  caters well for tourists' needs with a good range of restaurants and bars. It has a zoo, but the one at Figuiera is better, and a water park.
Friguia Zoo — near the town of Enfidha Well cared for animals. Although not in an authentic setting, see lions and elephants in Africa!
Sahara Explorer — two-day, one-night "safaris" to the south of the country can usually be arranged via Tour Companies, local Travel Agents or hotel receptions. Three-day, two-night "safaris" are usually arranged via local Travel Agents or hotel receptions. Essentially they are tourist adventures to the edge of the desert which may include, variously, visits to El Djem and its Roman amphitheatre, Berber Arab cave dwellings, the Chott el Jerid - a massive salt lake - and a sunset camel ride in the Sahara amongst other attractions. The three day, two night "safaris" are generally the less frantic of the two and allow more time to look around at leisure.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
MEDINA OF SOUSSE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: historical_district
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:55:10


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 411
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medina_of_Sousse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Medina of Sousse is a Medina quarter in Sousse, Governorate of Sousse, Tunisia. Designated by the UNESCO a World Heritage Site in 1988, it is a typical example of the architecture of the early centuries of Islam in Maghreb.
It encompasses a Kasbah, fortifications and the Great Mosque of Sousse. The Medina today houses the Archaeological Museum of Sousse. A number of Punic steles were discovered in the Medina, between the Ribat and the Great Mosque, in the 19th and 20th centuries.

History
The Medina of Sousse is located in the Tunisian Sahel and forms an outstanding archeological site. This was primarily because of the time it was built at the dawn of Islamic civilization, making it one of the earliest constructions after the Islamic conquests in the Maghreb. It was also because of the location of the Medina, a site that required protection against piracy and plunder.
The constructions comprised in its precincts witnessed the early post-conquest civilisations. Its architectural style, from the time of the Aghlabid, is representative of the military coastal constructions of the era, meant to be stout and imposing, so as to ward off foes.

Climate change
As a coastal heritage site, Medina of Sousse is vulnerable to sea level rise. In 2022, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report included it in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with the warming of over 4 °C., and is no longer considered very likely. The other, more plausible scenarios result in lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet, sea levels would continue to increase for about 10,000 years under all of them. Even if the warming is limited to 1.5 °C, global sea level rise is still expected to exceed 2–3 m (7–10 ft) after 2000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger increases by then), consequently exceeding 2100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~0.75 m (2 ft) with a range of 0.5–1 m (2–3 ft)) well before the year 4000. This means that unless effective adaptation efforts such as sea walls can be constructed to deal with the sea level rise, damage and the potential destruction of Medina of Sousse is a matter of time.

See Also
Zawiya of Sidi Bouraoui


== References ==



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
RIBAT OF SOUSSE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: fortress
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:55:18


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,010
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ribat_of_Sousse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ribat of Sousse (Arabic: رباط سوسة) is a ribat in the city of Sousse, Tunisia. Although scholars differ on the chronology of its original construction, it was most likely founded in the 8th century and reconstructed or completed in its current form during the early 9th century, under the Aghlabid dynasty. Although a large number of ribats were built in the region during that period, the Ribat of Sousse is by far the best-preserved.

History
The Ribat of Sousse was founded during the 8th century, or late 8th century, during the tenure of the Abbasid governor Yazid ibn Hatim al-Muhallabi (d. 787). There is also evidence that the site of the ribat was formerly occupied in Classical antiquity, reflecting the fact that many ribats in Tunisia were built over the remains of more ancient fortifications.

In the year 800 the Abbasid Caliph Harun al-Rashid granted the governorship of Ifriqiya (roughly modern-day Tunisia) to Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab, who founded the Aghlabid dynasty that ruled the region for the next century, nominally on behalf of the Abbasids. This was period in which the construction of ribats proliferated, and they were constructed at regular intervals along Ifriqiya's coastline, permitting signals to be sent rapidly between them. An inscription carved on a marble plaque over the doorway of the ribat's cylindrical tower records the name of the Aghlabid emir Ziyadat Allah I and the year 821. It also names Masrur al-Khadim, a freed slave and Ziyadat Allah's mawla, as responsible for the construction. This is the oldest surviving Islamic-era monumental inscription in Tunisia. The full Arabic inscription and its translation reads:

In the name of God, the Kind, the Merciful. God’s Blessing. This is what the Emir Ziyādat Allāh ibn Ibrāhīm has ordered, may God prolong his life!... by the hands of Masrūr al-Khūdim [the servant], his emancipated slave, in the year 206 [821 AD]. O God, lead us down into a blessed home. You are the best of leaders.
Some scholars have interpreted the date in this inscription as the year of the ribat's original foundation. Other scholars, such as Alexandre Lézine and Jonathan Bloom, interpret this date as the year when the tower was added to the existing ribat. Georges Marçais cited the year 821 as the date of the tower's construction and the completion of the ribat in its current form. Mourad Rammah states that the ribat was almost certainly founded in the 8th century but was completely reconstructed by Ziyadat Allah I in 821. Scholar Sibylle Mazot states that soil analysis has demonstrated that the ribat's foundation is indeed older than 821 and dates back to the 8th century, so that the year 821 signifies the date of a reconstruction. 
During the restoration, two floors, a basement, and battlements were added, as well as thirty rooms for guards to live complete with bathroom and toilet. A mosque was also established on the terrace and used by the citizens of Sousse especially during the Eid al-Fitr or Eid al-Adha. It is considered the first mosque built in the city, older even than the Bou Ftata Mosque and the Great Mosque of Sousse. The ribat is also equipped with a water basin that collects rainwater for the use of drinking and washing. The basin was first built by Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab and was expanded later by Ziyadat Allah. After the Byzantine city of Melite (modern Mdina on Malta) was captured by the Aghlabids in 870, marble and columns plundered from its churches was used to build the Ribat.
The north and east wings of the ribat's interior were rebuilt or restored in 1722. Other than this, the building has mostly retained its original aspect. In 1988 it was inscribed, along with the Medina of Sousse, as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Architecture
The ribat is built of stone and consists of a square walled enclosure measuring around 38 meters long and 11 meters high. Its plan resembles the original form of the Ribat of Monastir founded in 796 by Harthama ibn A'yan. Round towers reinforce its corners and the middle of its of its four sides, except for the southeastern corner, where a square tower serves as the base for a tall cylindrical tower on top of it, and the middle south side, where a projecting rectangular salient serves as the entrance gate. The gate entrance is framed by reused ancient columns. Inside the gate are narrow openings for a former portcullis and for defenders to drop projectiles or boiling oil on attackers. The vestibule of the gate is covered by a groin vault and flanked by guardrooms.The gate leads to the rectangular courtyard which is flanked by arcades on four sides, behind which are lines of small rooms and an upper floor. There are 33 narrow rooms in total on the ground floor. Most of the rooms and galleries are covered by barrel vaults made of rubble stone, except for those of the north and east sides (rebuilt in the 18th century) which contain groin vaults. Stairs lead to the upper floor, which is lined by more rooms on three sides. The south side is occupied by a long vaulted hall with a mihrab (niche symbolizing the direction of prayer), which is the oldest preserved mosque or prayer hall in North Africa. The room is divided into two aisles by a row of cross-shaped pillars supporting a vaulted ceiling. It had a capacity of about 200 worshipers.Another set of stairs leads to the roof and the top of the walls, which are crowned with crenellations on both their inner and outer edges. Another small room in the fortress, located above the gate at the top of the walls, contains another mihrab and is covered by a dome supported on squinches. This is the oldest example of a dome with squinches in Islamic North Africa. The cylindrical tower above the southeast corner was most likely intended as a lighthouse. It can be ascended via a spiral staircase inside. It has a marble inscription plaque over its entrance (mentioned above).


== References ==



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
MATMATA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: village
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:55:26


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 36
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matmata
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Matmata may refer to:

Places
Matmata, Tunisia, a town in Tunisia
Matmata, Morocco, a town in Morocco

Other uses
Matmatah, French rock band
Matmata Berber, Tunisian dialect

See also
Matamata, a similarly-named town in New Zealand


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 796
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matmata
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Matmata (arabe : مطماطة ) est un village du sud de la Tunisie dépendant du gouvernorat de Gabès.
Même si la Nouvelle Matmata est devenue la principale localité de la région, le centre de la tribu des Matmata reste l'ancien village situé au cœur des montagnes. Le développement urbain et l'exode rural des populations a vidé et désertifié celui-ci au profit de la nouvelle ville moderne.

Étymologie
Le terme Matmata provient du nom de la tribu berbère des Matmata (en langue berbère Imatmaten),  qui est elle-même descendante des Temzit et longuement décrite par Ibn Khaldoun dans son ouvrage Histoire des Berbères et des dynasties musulmanes de l'Afrique septentrionale. Elle fonde, près d'une source thermale, la ville de Hamma Matmata (actuelle El Hamma). Elle est contrainte de la fuir au cours des invasions des Hilaliens et fonde l'actuelle Matmata dans les montagnes avoisinantes qui portent le même nom. Toutefois, on n'y parle plus berbère, ce qui est encore le cas dans les villages voisins de Taoujout, Tamezret, Techine et Zraoua.

Géographie
Situés au sud-est du Chott el-Jérid, dans les contreforts du Djebel Dahar, les monts de Matmata dominent la vaste plaine de la Djeffara et constituent une cuesta (515 mètres) dégagée dans les roches calcaires et les marnes du Crétacé supérieur et moyen par divers oueds.
Le village se trouve à quarante kilomètres au sud-ouest de Gabès. Accroché à flanc de montagne, à 600 mètres d'altitude, ce village compte 4 075 habitants en 2022. Il est renommé pour ses remarquables habitations troglodytiques qui en font l'un des hauts lieux du tourisme tunisien.

Histoire
Au cours des bombardements alliés de la ville de Gabès alors aux mains des Allemands plusieurs familles gabésiennes fuient leur ville pour se réfugier dans les maisons troglodytiques de Matmata.
Matmata a aussi été le fief des militants nationalistes tunisiens (fellagas) qui prennent les armes contre le protectorat français sous la conduite de Mohamed Daghbaji, plusieurs de ses compagnons étant originaires de la ville de Matmata.
Juste après l'indépendance de la Tunisie proclamée en 1956, le gouvernement tunisien tente de déplacer les populations des montagnes vers de nouvelles villes installées sur le plateau de l'Aradh (Nouvelle Matmata et Nouvelle Zraoua) mais la majorité de la population préfère garder son logis à proximité de leurs jardins perchés dans les montagnes.

Habitations troglodytiques
Ce sont des habitations creusées dans les flancs de la montagne autour d'un vaste puits habituellement circulaire. Autour de ce puits constituant la cour de l'habitation sont creusées longitudinalement et en étages les pièces qui serviront pour l'étage inférieur de chambres (camour), de cuisine (matbakh), de bergerie pour les chèvres et d'étables, l'étage supérieur étant réservé pour le stockage (makhzen) des céréales, dattes, olives et figues séchées.

Dans cette région soumise à de très fortes canicules, plusieurs mois par an, cet aménagement particulier de l'habitat permet de faire pénétrer la lumière dans les pièces souterraines tout en y maintenant de la fraîcheur au plus chaud de l'été. Bien que la température intérieure de ces habitations ne soit pas constante durant toute l'année, comme dans une grotte, les amplitudes thermiques entre l'hiver et l'été y sont assez réduites : une quinzaine de degrés en janvier et 23 à 25 degrés en juillet.
Depuis le niveau naturel du sol extérieur, on descend généralement dans la cour directement au moyen d'un étroit escalier aménagé à flanc de paroi ou éventuellement d'une échelle appuyée contre cette dernière.
On peut aussi pénétrer dans la cour par un couloir souterrain horizontal qui s'amorce un peu en aval dans le flanc de la montagne (car la majorité de ces maisons sont aménagées sur des terrains pentus). Certaines maisons sont assez élaborées avec une succession de cours intérieures auxquelles on accède par des couloirs souterrains partant des logis ou de la cour principale, deux niveaux de pièces superposées, tunnel d'accès en pente douce s'amorçant à partir du rebord supérieur du puits, etc.

L'hôtel Sidi Driss sert de décor à Star Wars de George Lucas ; il s'agit de la résidence de la famille Lars où vivent Luke Skywalker, Beru et Owen Lars. Ce type de construction existait déjà il y a 3000 ans : les Phéniciens, qui débarquèrent vers 1200 av. J.-C. l'adoptèrent et les Romains reprirent à leur tour cette conception pour construire des appartements d'été dans leurs villes. Il existe en France un type d'habitat troglodytique fort similaire dans la région de Doué-la-Fontaine où les « caves demeurantes » de forme généralement rectangulaire — c'est ainsi qu'on appelle ces logements souterrains — sont creusées dans les parois de carrières de falun (variété de tuffeau) à ciel ouvert.
Le 10 janvier 2020, le gouvernement tunisien propose cet habitat pour un futur classement sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco.

Références
Liens externes

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail des Berbères


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 659
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Matmata
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Matmata is a village in the south of Tunisia, famous for its troglodyte (cave) dwellings. Scenes from a number of Star Wars movies were filmed here.

## Get in
There are regular daytime services by louage (shared taxi) or bus (8 daily) from Gabes (40 km north-east).
SNTRI[dead link] provides a daily bus service from Tunis Sud station (leaving at 21:30, 23.800 DT) via Sousse (leaving at 23:15, 16.870 DT) and Sfax (leaving 02:00, 10.610 DT), arriving at Matmata at 05:00 (Mar 2017).
By car - Matmata lies about 45min inland (south-west) from Gabes on a sealed road. Douz lies about 1 hr 30 min to the west. It's an 1-hour drive from Medenine across mountain roads, passing the historic town of Toujene.

## Get around
Matmata is very small, so you can easily walk between places.

## See
33.542699.967271 Hotel Sidi Driss. Scenes from the Lars homestead in Star Wars were filmed here. Accommodation is simple (the bedrooms are formed from individual caves hollowed out from the rock, with shared bathroom facilities), but unique; visit for a day trip or spend the night (see below). DT1.    (updated Apr 2022)
Ask your hotel if they can arrange a tour of a traditional troglodyte (cave) dwelling; many such properties are located around the village and are today still inhabited by local families. You may give the family a small tip (no more than 5DT)
There is a small museum behind the Hotel Sidi Driss, displaying local history. No written information in any language is available, so better come with a guide. DT3 per person (February 2018)
33.5383339.8652782 Village of Tamezret. The stone village, 10 km west of town on the Douz road makes an interesting side trip.
Mos Espa, home to a young Anakin Skywalker, was constructed from scratch in the desert near Tozeur, and traditional Berber architecture in the Tataouine area was used to portray the slave quarters where Anakin lives with his mother.

## Eat
There are a few restaurants serving typical Tunisian cuisine in the town center (where the three roads meet).

## Drink
Hotel Sidi Driss. The bar in this hotel serves local beer and is frequented by the villagers and tourists alike. English is spoken. See Sleep section on how to get there. DT3 for a beer. (updated Feb 2018)

## Sleep
33.5426499.9650861 Hotel Sidi Driss, 6070 Matmata Ancienne (Regular daytime service by louage (share taxi) or bus (8 daily) from Gabes (40 km). Specify Matmata Ancienne as some services terminate in Matmata Nouvelle 15 km distant), ☏ +216 75 240 005. Is the must-stay location in Matmata for any Star Wars fanatics. The hotel has about 20 rooms/caves, shared bathroom facilities, a restaurant and small bar. The rooms are very basic, and there are reports of bugs. The bar plays loud Arabic music 4-11PM and serves Celtia beer for 3DT. From 30DT/night per person including simple breakfast.    (updated Feb 2018)
33.5448989.9640282 Hotel Les Berberes, Near the city center, ☏ +216 75 240-024. Another traditional underground cave hotel. Similar to Sidi Driss, but said to be a bit cleaner. Don't expect a fancy hotel, but it's a very interesting experience to sleep in a cave. Breakfast is included, full board can be arranged. DT20 per person in double, DT30 including full board.    (updated Feb 2018)
33.5487999.9474493 Diar El Barbar, Route de Benyahya, km 2, C104 (West of Matmata along C104 road), ☏ +216 75 240 074. Partial cave hotel with a pool. A bit out of town, this hotel offers more amenities than some of the very basic places in town, for a higher price. Cleanliness has been questioned by some guests.    (updated Feb 2018)

## Go next
Tounine, Beni Zelten, Matmata Nouvelle, Mareth, Douz, Bazma
SNTRI[dead link] provides a daily bus service leaving from Matmata at 20:30 to Sfax (arriving 23:30, 10.610 DT), to Sousse (arriving at 02:15, 16.870 DT), and to Tunis Sud station (arriving at 04:00, 23.800 DT) (Mar 2017).



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
CHENINI
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: village
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:55:34


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 292
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chenini
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chenini (Arabic: شنيني) is a ruined Berber village in the Tataouine district in southern Tunisia. Located on a hilltop near a modern village of the same name, Chenini was a fortified granary, or ksar (plural ksour).

History
Like other ksour created by North African Berber communities, Chenini was built on a hilltop - in this instance, between two hilltop ridges - to help protect it from raiding parties. The oldest structures on the hillside date back to the 12th century; some of the buildings are still used to store grain for the villagers living in the valley below.

Modern times
Chenini and the surrounding Tataouine district are also associated with the Star Wars film series. Many scenes for the movies were filmed in the area; one of the moons of the home planet of Luke Skywalker was named Chenini.
As of 2023, Chenini was inhabited by around 500 Berber farmers and herders who live in caves carved out of rock, many of which have been modernized. The village is facing a demographic decline as younger generations leave for Tunis and Europe in search of work. Chenini has limited amenities, and did not have Internet access until 2013. For high school education and medical emergencies, residents must travel to Tataouine, about half an hour away.
The village has a modern counterpart called New Chenini, which has running water and electricity and was home to around 120 families as of 2023.
Chenini is a regular stop on southern Tunisia's ksar trail, along with the villages of Douiret, Ksar Ouled Soltane and Ksar Hadada.
The village is home to the Mosquée de Sept Dormants, 'Mosque of the Seven Sleepers', one of several sites associated with the pious legend.

Gallery
References

Lonely Planet Tunisia, 2nd edition.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 364
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chenini
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chenini (arabe : شنني) est un village troglodytique berbérophone du sud de la Tunisie situé à 18 kilomètres de Tataouine.

Ksar
Il est surplombé par un ksar citadelle (grenier fortifié), ou kalâa, juché sur une butte à environ 500 mètres d'altitude. Il s'agit d'un lieu de stockage des réserves alimentaires et des biens de valeur qui servait également de refuge en cas d'attaque. Comme les ksour de Douiret ou Guermessa, il a « permis aux Berbères […] de se maintenir, tout en établissant des relations de clientèle et de protection avec les tribus arabes » arrivées notamment lors des invasions hilaliennes au XIe siècle. « Lorsque le risque d'invasion ou de pillage [est] devenu moins important et avec la sédentarisation des berbères, le village a commencé à se développer sur les flancs de la butte et vers le bas » jusqu'à la création du nouveau village de Chenini vers 1960.

Économie
Des habitations troglodytes rénovées mais traditionnelles y servent d'hôtel touristique.

Culture populaire
Lieu de tourisme sur le circuit des ksour de Tunisie, Chenini est également connu à travers le monde entier pour son nom qui inspira le réalisateur de cinéma George Lucas dans le choix du nom de l'une des trois lunes de la planète Tatooine (Ghomrassen, Guermessa et Chenini) où sont nés Anakin Skywalker et Luke Skywalker dans Star Wars.

Notes et références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
Hédi Ben Ouezdou, Découvrir la Tunisie du Sud, de Matmata à Tataouine : ksour, jessour et troglodytes, Tunis, Hédi Ben Ouezdou, 2001, 78 p. (ISBN 978-9-973-31853-4).
Hatem Khatalli, Mongi Sghaier et Frédéric Sandron, « Le village berbère de Chenini (Sud-est tunisien) : richesse d'un patrimoine fragilisé », Revue des régions arides, no 38,‎ 2015, p. 49-67 (lire en ligne, consulté le 18 février 2024).
(en) Vivian Yee, « Tunisian Cave Village Empties Out in Face of Drought and Modernity's Draw », The New York Times,‎ 19 janvier 2023 (ISSN 0362-4331, lire en ligne, consulté le 18 février 2024).

Articles connexes
Ksour de Tunisie

Liens externes

Camille Lafrance, « Tunisie : les problèmes d'emploi dans le village de Chenini », sur RFI, 18 janvier 2015 (consulté le 18 février 2024).
 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail des Berbères



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
KSAR GHILANE
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: oasis
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:55:43


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 667
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ksar_Ghilane
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ksar Ghilane also known as Henchir Tébournouk is a Tunisian oasis, archaeological site and town of Tataouine Governorate located at 33° 00′ 31″ N, 9° 36′ 59″ E.

Location
Ksar Ghilane (قصر غيلان) is an oasis of southern Tunisia located on the eastern limit of the Grand Erg Oriental. Renowned for being the most southerly of the Tunisian oases and one of the gates of the Tunisian Sahara desert, the oasis is fed by a hot source water in which one can bathe and with alleged thermal virtues. Ksar Ghilane has long been difficult to reach but is now connected by an asphalt road to Douz (80 kilometers to the north) or Matmata: it can be now accessed by all-terrain vehicles or private or rental cars.

Economy
Ksar Ghilane hosts some fifty now sedentarized formerly nomadic families living from date palm agriculture, the raising of goats and sheep and an increasingly important tourist activity. For tourism, several activities are on offer: ATV quad biking, motorcycling, horseback riding or camel trekking on dromedaries. Tourists can enjoy the sandy landscapes while basking in the relative freshness of the oasis and the comfort of swimming in a hot spring (as nights in the desert can get cooler).
There are three campsites with Berber tents and a luxury hotel with about 60 air-conditioned tents, a guest house and a ranch with private rooms for overnight stays. In addition to those in the 3 campsites, some cafes and a restaurant are located around the hot spring.

History
As its name suggests (ksar means "castle" in Arabic), the oasis contains fortifications:
Less than a kilometer away from the palm trees stand the ruins of the Roman castellum named Tisavar. Build at the latest under emperor Commodus (180‑192 CE), it  was a border post on the Western portion of the limes tripolitanus, i.e. the Southern limes, or border of the Roman empire which, in Tunisia, follows the edge of the Sahara desert. Though partially covered by sand drift, three structures built on a hill remain visible today: The fortress with a small portion of its rampart walkway next to the entry gate still standing, and in its South-West a rectangular building of ca 12x8.5 meters. Opposite the fortress' gate is another building with rooms looking like small cells gathered in a rectangular shape with rounded angles around a rectangular central courtyard: those small rooms were the living quarters of the Legio III Augusta from the Roman Army of Africa and in the center of the courtyard, a temple dedicated to Jupiter has been found. A bit lower on the dune a trefoiled-shaped small construction has been excavated and shown to function as a chapel (a votive writing dedicating it to the local genie of Tisavar was found in it)
The Tunisian government requested (on Feb 17th, 2012) for the Tisavar Roman ruins for be included in a future classification on the UNESCO World Heritage List.
In 1906, large deposits of phosphates and iron were found in the area prompting the construction of a railway track to connect the mining area to the rest of the network.

During World War II the town was involved in the battle of Tunisia. One kilometer to the East of this battle site stands a commemorative stele, locally known under the General Leclerc's column name. It celebrates the presence of the French army in 1943, during the battle of Ksar Ghilane. The stela's writing reads:
"Here, from February 23rd to March 10th 1943, General Leclerc and Force L, coming from Chad, successfully supported the assault of the enemy forces, inflicting severe losses on them."
In 2001, the television show The Amazing Race 1 went through the town, and in 2011 the Saharun road race went through the town.
In 2010, a Martian (Shergottite) meteorite fell close to the oasis. It was analyzed and approved as an official meteorite under the Ksar Ghilaine 002 name. It is the 100th meteorite of Martian origin ever collected on earth.


== References ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 899
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ksar_Ghilane
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ksar Ghilane (arabe : قصر غيلان) est une oasis du sud de la Tunisie située sur la limite est du Grand Erg oriental.
Réputée être la plus méridionale des oasis tunisiennes et l'une des portes du désert du Sahara tunisien, une source d'eau chaude affleure dans l'oasis. Cette source, dans laquelle il est le plus souvent possible de se baigner, aurait des vertus thermales. 
Du fait de sa position à la frontière du monde sédentarisé, la localité de Ksar Ghilane a toujours été connectée aux provinces côtières, mais est longtemps restée difficile d'accès. Elle est désormais reliée par une route asphaltée à Douz (80 kilomètres au nord) ou Matmata que peuvent emprunter les véhicules tout terrain ou les voitures privées ou de location.

Histoire
Comme son nom l'indique (ksar est un mot arabe qui signifie « château »), elle abrite un fort datant de l'époque romaine, Tisavar (de), situé sur le limes qui suit la limite du désert. Le gouvernement tunisien l'a proposé le 17 février 2012 pour un futur classement sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'Unesco.
À un kilomètre à l'est est érigée une stèle, la colonne du général Leclerc, qui témoigne du passage de son armée en 1943 lors de la bataille de Ksar Ghilane. Elle porte l'inscription suivante :
« Ici, du 23 février au 10 mars 1943, le Général Leclerc et la Force L, venus du Tchad, ont soutenu victorieusement l'assaut des forces ennemies, leur infligeant des pertes sévères. »

Démographie
La population de Ksar Ghilaine s'élève à 300 personnes (une cinquantaines de familles), autrefois semi-nomades mais actuellement sédentarisées, qui vivent actuellement de l'exploitation du palmier-dattier, de l'élevage des chèvres et des moutons, d'une activité touristique d'importance croissante dans les années 2000 avant la pandémie de coronavirus et d'un peu de développement du maraîchage par irrigation.

Tourisme
Concernant l'activité de tourisme saharien en croissance continue entre 1970 et 2018, il est possible de faire du quad, de la moto, des randonnées à cheval ou des méharées à dos de dromadaires. Cinq unités touristiques d'un total de 600 lits sont disponibles : trois campements avec tentes berbères, un hôtel de luxe avec une soixantaine de tentes climatisées, une maison d'hôtes et un ranch avec chambres privées. Quelques cafés et un restaurant sont installés autour de la source en plus de ceux présents dans les campements.

Défense
L'oasis abrite aussi un poste de la garde nationale et une caserne de l'armée tunisienne.

Climat
L'oasis est située dans la dépression de Bouflija, c'est-à-dire l'exutoire des oueds Bou el-Khcheb, Laarej et Mahbes. Les précipitations y sont rares (moins de cinquante millimètres par an), irrégulières d'années en années et peuvent être localisées de façon aléatoire. 
Les températures dépassent régulièrement les 50°C en été, mais il gèle en dessous de 0°C en hiver. L'écart thermique interjournalier est aussi très important (une nuit peut être particulièrement froide, la suivante moins, mais le jour suivant être très chaud, etc.). Un vent sableux souffle en moyenne 120 jours par an. Le vent brûlant de type sirocco souffle pendant la période estivale quarante jours par an en moyenne.

Accès à l'eau
Traditionnellement, des puits de trois à six mètres de profondeur (dits thmeds) étaient creusés par les éleveurs dans les lits des oueds et les parcours nomadiques suivaient leur épuisement au cours de l'année. Ces puits intermittents très simples étaient complétés par quelques puits de surface atteignant la nappe phréatique (profondeur maximum atteinte : 35 mètres) dont l'eau était remontée avec une poche de cuir (dalou ou delou) et qui garantissaient un accès à l'eau toute l'année, même si leur niveau fluctuait.
Avec la mécanisation et l'utilisation de pompes Diesel, des forages sont creusés pour atteindre le niveau de la nappe du complexe terminal (qui se trouve entre 70 et 300 mètres de profondeur). Les premiers forages conduisent dans les années 1950 au développement d'une palmeraie de 100 hectares et à la fixation des familles qui auparavant vivaient d'élevage et ne passaient qu'une partie de l'année dans la localité (caractéristique d'une « zone de parcours »).
Depuis les années 1990, des forages profonds ont permis d'atteindre la nappe au niveau continental intercalaire (en dessous de 1 000 mètres).
En 1990, des puits de surface sont équipées d'éoliennes, toujours visibles dans les années 2020. Leur utilisation dans la durée est rendue difficile par l'absence de service après-vente (des actions d'entretien sont fournies par une société locale). En 1995, avec l'appui de la coopération allemande, deux puits sont équipés de pompes photovoltaïques. Depuis, les systèmes photovoltaïques se sont multipliés dans l'oasis et sur les zones de parcours pour abreuver les animaux. Toutefois, les eaux pompées en profondeur en 1995 se sont révélées de mauvaise qualité et de forte salinité (plus de quatre grammes par litre).
Un projet soutenu par l'Agence espagnole pour la coopération internationale au développement et l'appui de l'Institut technologique des îles Canaries a permis à l'Agence nationale pour la maîtrise de l'énergie et les autorités locales chargées de la gestion de l'eau d'installer une station de dessalement par osmose inverse alimentée par l'énergie photovoltaïque et des bassins de stockage en 2006.

Évènements
En 2010, une météorite d'origine martienne de type shergottite s'écrase à proximité de l'oasis. Officiellement enregistrée sous le nom de code international Ksar Ghilaine 002, il s'agit de la centième météorite d'origine martienne collectée jusqu'à présent sur Terre.

Notes et références
Liens externes

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail des déserts


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 296
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Ksar_Ghilane
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Ksar Ghilane (قصر غيلان) is an oasis in Southern Tunisia located on the boundary of the Grand Erg Oriental.

## Understand
Ksar Ghilane is considered the most southern Tunisian oasis and one of the gates to the Sahara Desert in Tunisia. As its name says (ksar is an Arabic word which means "castle"), it features a fort dating from ancient Roman times. The Tunisian government proposed the fort on 17 February 2012 for future ranking on the list of UNESCO World Heritage.
The oasis is fed by a hot spring where you can swim. Ksar Ghilane has long been difficult to access: it is now connected by a paved road from Douz (80 miles north) or Matmata that can take off-road vehicles or cars.
It is a refuge for fifty families who harvest dates and breed goats and sheep. Tourism is an increasingly important industry. Several activities are available: quad biking, motorcycles, horseback riding or of méharées on camel.
Visitors can enjoy the sandy landscapes, while enjoying the relative cool of the oasis and the comfort of bathing in a hot spring. Three camps with Berber tents and a luxury hotel including sixty-conditioned tents are used to spend the night.
One kilometre to the east stands a pillar, the column of General Leclerc, reflecting the passage of his army in 1943 at the Battle of Ksar Ghilane. It bears the following inscription:
« Ici, du 23 février au 10 mars 1943, le Général Leclerc et la Force L, venus du Tchad, ont soutenu victorieusement l'assaut des forces ennemies, leur infligeant des pertes sévères. »
'Here, from February 23 to 10 March 1943, General Leclerc and the L Force, which came from Chad, victoriously sustained an  assault by enemy forces, inflicting upon them severe losses.'



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ICHKEUL NATIONAL PARK
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: natural_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:55:51


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 347
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lake_Ichkeul
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lake Ichkeul (Arabic: بحيرة اشكل, romanized: Buḥayra ʾIshkul) is a lake in northern Tunisia, located 20 kilometres (12 miles) to Bizerte, the northernmost city in Africa on the Mediterranean Sea. The lake and wetlands of Ichkeul National Park are an important stopping-over point for hundreds of thousands of migrating birds each year. Among the lake's visitors are ducks, geese, storks, and pink flamingoes. Dam construction on the lake's feeder rivers has produced major changes to the ecological balance of the lake and wetlands.

History
In the reign of the Hafsid dynasty, Lake Ichkuel was a reserve during the 13th century. It later became the property of the public domain in the early 20th century during French rule. Since 1980, it has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Because dams have sharply reduced the freshwater inflow to the lakes and marshes, the reedbeds, sedges, and other fresh-water plant species have been replaced with salt-loving plants. These changes have produced a sharp reduction in the migratory bird populations, which depend on the mix of plants that used to exist.
According to the UNESCO Website, the Tunisian government has undertaken some steps to retain freshwater and reduce salinity, and the lake was removed from UNESCO's list of World heritage in danger in 2006.
However some reports from the World Conservation Union suggest that the salinity has already become excessively high and the possibility for rehabilitation may be rapidly disappearing.

Ichkeul National Park
Ichkeul National Park is a World Heritage Site located in the north of Tunisia, 25 km southwest of Bizerte and 15 km north of Mateur. The park has been on the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites since 1980, and between 1996 and 2006 the park has also been on the group's list of World Heritage in Danger. The park is managed by the Tunisian Ministry of Agriculture.
The flowering plant Teucrium_schoenenbergeri Nabli found only in Tunisia was harvested in 1965 in the Park.

Gallery
References
External links
UNESCO website
WCMC datasheet
ACST Photos: Exploring Lak Ichkeul
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Archived 2006-10-01 at the Wayback Machine


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 488
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Ichkeul_National_Park
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Ichkeul National Park (French: Parc national d'Ichkeul) is a UNESCO World Heritage Site in Northern Tunisia, Tunisia, located in the commune of Tinja.

## History
The park was a game reserve during the reign of the Hafsides dynasty in the 13th century and then became the property of the public domain in the early 20th century.
The park has been a biosphere reserve since 1977 and has been a world heritage site in Tunisia since 1980. Between 1996 and 2006 it was included among those in danger, in fact the site was threatened by the construction of dams on the rivers upstream. which increase the salinity of the water disturbing the ecosystem. Tunisian authorities have ended the agricultural use of the lake's waters, reducing salinity and allowing many bird species to return to the park removing the park from the World Heritage List in Danger.

## Landscape
The park covers a rectangular area of 11.4 by 20 kilometres and rises around Lake Ichkeul, located near the shores of the Mediterranean Sea.
The lake has the particularity of being fed by six wadis in fresh water during the winter and being connected to the Mediterranean Sea through the Bizerte lake (in the Tinja channel) during the summer, which significantly increases the salinity of the waters and is the last vestige of a chain of lakes that once stretched across North Africa.

## Flora and fauna
Lake Ichkeul and the park's marshes are a major landing place for hundreds of thousands of migratory birds each year. Among the "guests" of the lake include ducks, geese, storks and pink flamingos.
The dams built on the tributaries have caused severe changes in the ecological balance of the lake and marshes. The dams have markedly reduced the flow of water into the lakes and other pools of fresh water, causing the patches of ciperaceae to give way to plants more accustomed to salt water. These changes have limited the influx of migratory birds due to the limited availability of plants.

## Get in
From Bizerte, take the RN 11, south-west towards Mateur. After crossing Tinja the road cuts the railway. The national park entrance is on the right, 50 metres further.
From Tunis, take the RN 7 road to Mateur. Then turn right onto the RN 11 heading north towards Bizerte. The entrance to the national park is 50 metres before crossing the Mateur-Tinja railway.

## See
37.1629.6670641 Lake Ichkeul. An important stopping-over point for hundreds of thousands of migrating birds each year. Among the lake's visitors are ducks, geese, storks, and pink flamingoes.   (updated Dec 2021)
37.1382969.6924632 Musée Ecologique du Parc National d'Ichkeul (Ecological Museum of Ichkeul National Park). An ecological museum about the local flora and fauna that pass the region, and the significance of this local reserve to the environment. Most things in the museum are bilingual, but only in French and Arabic, not English.    (updated Dec 2021)



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ZAGHOUAN AQUEDUCT
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:55:59


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,594
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zaghouan_Aqueduct
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Zaghouan Aqueduct or Aqueduct of Carthage is an ancient Roman aqueduct, which supplied the city of Carthage, Tunisia with water. From its source in Zaghouan it flows a total of 132 km, making it among the longest aqueducts in the Roman Empire.
Some of its length (40 ha area) is also classified as an Important Bird Area (TN013) as the cavities and holes in the aqueduct are used as nesting and roosting sites by falcons and other species.

Date
The date of the construction of the aqueduct is not entirely clear. Sources mention a visit by the Emperor Hadrian in 128, with which a five-year-long drought is meant to have come to an end. The water shortage resulting from the drought might have convinced him that the people should not rely only on rainwater anymore. A second event that might have inspired it was the opening of the Baths of Antonius in Carthage in 162. These facilities on the same scale as the Imperial baths in Rome demanded a steady supply of water, which could not be fulfilled with rainwater.

Sources
The aqueduct draws on several sources which ran dry at different times. The first and most important source is located near the town of Zaghouan in the Djebel Zaghouan, a mountain range about 60 km south of Carthage. In Roman times a sacred fountain structure was built over the spring, which became one of the most important in ancient North Africa.

Description
The sacred fountain is located on an artificial terrace. It is open on the north side, and on the southern side there is an open space enclosed by a 4-metre-wide (13 ft), crescent-shaped portico. In the center of the portico is a cella from which the spring sprang.
The outer wall had a core of Roman concrete covered with coarse limestone bossages. This wall continued from the ends of the crescent-shaped portico and was divided into 26 sections be engaged columns. In every second section, there is a niche for statues, which do not survive. Opposite each engaged column is a full column, which together once supported a vaulted peristyle. The vaults are made of porous travertine covered in marble, while the columns are sandstone. The exterior of the vault was sealed with waterproof Opus signinum and left without further protection. The floor of the portico was decorated with mosaic. The cella, the most important part of the building was built from limestone and clad in marble.

Intake
There were five springs in the area of the sacred fountain. These were in the area of the artificial terrace in their original, underground bed and gathered in a basin under the terrace. From this basin, the water then flowed into the pipe of the aqueduct. As well as feeding the aqueduct intake, the basin also served to clean the water - while the water sat in the basin, impurities would settle on the bottom.

Second source
In Severan times, a second source was attached to the aqueduct. This was located in the region of Djouggar. A sacred fountain was built over this spring too, but it never reached the significance of the one at Zaghouan.

Water channel
Technical data
The aqueduct is a masterpiece of Roman engineering. In the journey from Zaghouan to Carthage, it travels a little over 90 km and drops only 264 m in height, which is an average decline of 0.3%. However, 130 m of the height difference occurs in the first 6 km from Zaghouan to Moghrane. For the rest of the journey to Carthage, the decline averages only 0.15%. In Moghrane the aqueduct met the later channel coming from Djouggar, another 33 km away. Including all its tributary channels, the aqueduct has a length of 132 km and is among the longest in the Roman empire.
The channel discharged between 200 and 370 L of water per second or between 17 and 32 million liters per day. The flow rate was around 3.5 and 5.5 km per hour. Therefore, the water made the journey from Zaghouan to Carthage in between a day and a half, to two days.

Course
The channel was built such that it had a steady, if not uniform, fall so that the water would travel the route by the force of gravity alone. In order to minimize the building work, the channel was laid on or a little under the Earth's surface where possible. In order to avoid unnecessary loss of height, the channel follows the contours of hills. In three places it was not possible for the channel to remain at ground level, so the engineers erected imposing arcades. They are:

The plain of Oudna: 5 km, including a 125-metre-long (410 ft) bridge on a double arcade with a height of 33 m. This bridge was demolished in 1859 in order to reuse the stone for the construction of a new bridge.
The plain of Miliane: 2 km, the arcade reaches up to 20 m in height.
The plain of La Soukra, before Carthage: 10 km, the arcade reaches up to 20 m in height.

Cross-section
In cross-section, the channel measures about 90 cm in width and 130 cm in height. It was closed on top by a vault. The walls were made from Roman cement and were clad with sandstone bossage. The part of the channel which came in contact with water was further clad in waterproof opus signinum. The screed also served to smooth the channel's rate of decline. Ventilation was provided by small, square openings in the roof. At regular intervals on the base of the channel, there were circular depressions, which served to purify the water, since detritus would settle in them. To continue to operate, these had to be cleaned out regularly, so the channel required ongoing care and attention

Cisterns
The distribution of the water within Carthage is not yet entirely clear. It seems that the channel discharged into two cisterns and the water was further distributed from these. To date, however, archaeological excavations have found no sure signs of discharge into the cisterns.

Cisterns of La Malga
The cisterns of La Malga form the largest cisterns surviving from the ancient world anywhere. They held approximately 51 million liters. Based on the nature of the mortar, they are dated to the first century AD. It is not yet clear how these cisterns were used in that period, since the aqueduct had not yet been built and this enormous volume could never have been filled by rainwater alone.

Cistern of Bordj Djedid
The cistern of Bordj Djedid is made up of 18 barrel-shaped basins arranged in parallel and held between 25 and 30 million liters. It was responsible for supplying the Baths of Antonius. The construction date is unknown, but modifications have been detected in connection with the construction of the Baths of Antonius, implying that the cistern preceded the baths.

Later usage
Since the water supply was essential for the city, the aqueduct was destroyed during the Vandal siege of 439, the Eastern Roman reconquest under Justinian and finally at the conquest of Carthage by the Arabs in 698, but each time it was subsequently restored. In the thirteenth century, one of the Hafsid rulers added a branch leading to his palace in Manouba in order to supply water for his garden. From the sixteenth century, the aqueduct deteriorated rapidly and was employed as a stone quarry.
In 1859 a French engineer received the task of restoring the water channel in order to supply Tunis with water. While the majority of the channels at ground level could be reused, the parts of the channel on pillars were mostly destroyed and a modern pressure pipe system was installed. Since it was put into operation in 1862, the channel has remained in use and today it supplies an average of 12,000,000 L per day in winter and 3,000,000 in summer.

Important Bird Area
The cavities and holes in the aqueduct are used as nesting and roosting sites by the lesser kestrel Falco naumanni (30 pairs), but also by the Lanner falcon Falco biarmicus and the common kestrel Falco tinnunculus as well as the European roller Coracias garrulus, rock sparrows Petronia petronia, spotless starlings Sturnus unicolor and common ravens Corvus corax. The site is of particular significance for the lesser krestel as it regularly holds significant numbers the species, (which is a species of global conservation concern).
The protected area extends over 40 ha as a band stretching near the Milliana river along the aqueduct 20-m-high pillars and arches in which many cavities and holes used by birds have developed. The surrounding area consists of cereal fields and is a hunting reserve.

Gallery
See also
List of aqueducts in the Roman Empire
List of Roman aqueducts by date
Ancient Roman technology
Roman engineering

References
General

Friedrich Rakob. "Das römische Quellenheiligtum bei Zaghouan in Tunesien". In Archäologischer Anzeiger 84, 1969, pp. 284–300.
Friedrich Rakob. "Das Quellenheiligtum in Zaghouan und die römische Wasserleitung nach Karthago." In: Römische Mitteilungen 81, 1974, pp. 51–89.
Friedrich Rakob. "Die römische Wasserleitung von Karthago." In J.-P. Boucher (Ed.), Journées d‘études sur les aqueducs romains = Tagung über römische Wasserversorgungsanlagen, Lyon 26.-28. Mai 1977. Paris 1983, pp. 309–318.
H. Slim. "Maîtrise de l'eau en Tunisie à l'époque romaine." In G. Argoud et al. (Edd.): L’eau et les hommes en Méditerranée et en Mer Noire dans l’antiquité. Athen 1992, pp. 513–532.
A. Wilson. "Water supply in ancient Carthage." In Carthage papers, Portsmouth, RI 1998, ISBN 1-887829-28-8 (Journal of Roman Archaeology, Supplementary series 28), pp. 65–102.
Specific



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
THUBURBO MAJUS
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:56:07


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 567
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thuburbo_Majus
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thuburbo Majus (or Thuburbo Maius) is a large Roman site in northern Tunisia. It is located roughly 60 km southwest of Carthage on a major African thoroughfare.  This thoroughfare connects Carthage to the Sahara.  Other towns along the way included Sbiba, Sufes, Sbeitla, and Sufetula.  Parts of the old Roman road are in ruins, but others do remain.

History
Thuburbo Majus or Colonia Julia Aurelia Commoda, its Roman name, was originally a Punic town, later founded as a Roman veteran colony by Augustus in 27 BC. Military veterans were sent to Thuburbo, among other sites, by Augustus to allow them to start their post-army lives with land of their own.  Its strategic location and access to trade routes made it an important establishment. Ruins of the town are in the middle of the countryside with no towns in close proximity.
Most of the town was built around 150–200 and restored in the 4th century after the Crisis of the Third Century. It received a Capitolium in 168.  The town was a productive grower of grain, olives, and fruit.  Under Hadrian it was made a municipium, helping cause a growth in wealth, and Commodus made it a colony. The early third century Christian martyr Perpetua was born in the town.

Excavations
A 1916 excavation found a tetrastyle temple.  The building was decorated with statues of Apollo, Venus, Silvanus, Bacchus, the Dioscuri, and a satyr.  Three perfume vases showed dogs pursuing rabbits.
In 1920 an inscription found in Thuburbo Majus written in honor of C. Vettius Sabinianus proved that several other inscriptions bearing that name were referring to the same person.
Remains of the house of Bacchus and Ariadne dating back to the early 5th century were excavated in 1925.  Researchers found the town to be a valuable site, as evidence of food preparation in a garden was discovered.  Those and other finds point to what daily life in ancient Rome might have been like.  Mosaics found in the town date to the late 4th century.  These mosaics depict items from nature, like a still life arrangement of food items and a sea filled with fish as young people fish from boats. They have been studied by archaeologist Aïcha Ben Abed. Another mosaic represents a nude Venus riding a chariot, with plant life surrounding her to represent well-being and fertility.
This town does not have fully restored buildings, but there are remains of a forum, the amphitheatre, temples, baths, houses, and other sites.

Bishopric
The Bishopric was founded during the Roman Empire and survived through the Arian Vandal and Orthodox Byzantine empires, only ceasing to function with the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb. The diocese was refounded in name at least in the 20th century. Known bishops include:

Sedatus, present at the Council of Carthage (256),
Faustus, at the Council of Arles (314),
Catholic Bishop Cyprianus, at the Council of Carthage (411),
Donatist Bishop Rufinus, at the Council of Carthage, 411,
Benenatus, exiled by the Vandal king Huneric, 484.

References
Further reading
Scheding, Paul (2019). Urbaner Ballungsraum im römischen Nordafrika. Zum Einfluss von mikroregionalen Wirtschafts- und Sozialstrukturen auf den Städtebau in der Africa Proconsularis [Urban agglomeration in Roman North Africa. On the influence of micro-regional economic and social structures on urban development in Africa Proconsularis]. Wiesbaden: Reichert, ISBN 978-3-95490-313-9 (with Thuburbo Majus as one of five case studies).

External links

Ancient Places TV: HD Video of Thuburbo Maius
Lexicorient


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 181
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%AA%D9%88%D8%A8%D8%B1%D8%A8%D9%88_%D9%85%D8%A7%D8%AC%D9%88%D8%B3
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

توبربو ماجوس هي مدينة أثرية تونسية تقع قرب مدينة الفحص في ولاية زغوان. تعود معالم الموقع إلى العهد الروماني إلا أن اكتشاف أدوات وصوان حجرية تدل على وجود نشاط إنساني فيه منذ العصر اللوبي .

تاريخها
بنيت المدينة على مراحل إذ شيدت في 27 قبل الميلاد مستعمرة رومانية بجوار الموقع اللوبي قبل أن يلتحم المجمعان سنة 188. عرفت المدينة في تلك الفترة ازدهارا معماريا كبير فشيدت عدة معالم ومنشآت عامة ومنازل فخمة، وقد فاق عدد سكانها وقتها العشرة آلاف نسمة.
دخلت المدينة في حالة من التقهقر في أواسط القرن الثالث قبل أن تعود إلى سالف إشعاعها في القرن الرابع وتعلن نفسها كجمهورية تحت اسم "ريبوبليكا فيليكس توبربو ماجوس"، إلا أنها لم تدم طويلا لتنحصر الحياة المدنية فيها مع الغزو الوندالي وتصبح مهجورة تماما مع بداية القرن السابع. يشكل موقع توبربو ماجوس أكبر مدينة أثرية في البلاد التونسية بمساحة حوالي 40 هكتارا، ورغم القيام بعدد من الحفريات فإنها لم تكشف كامل الموقع. يضم الموقع كابيتولا ومعابد وحمامات وحيّا سكنيا يضم منازل ومنشآت تحتوي على عدد كبير من لوحات الفسيفساء.

معرض الصور
انظر أيضا
قائمة المواقع الأثرية في تونس.
زغوان.


== المراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 2,380
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thuburbo_Majus
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thuburbo Majus est un site archéologique situé au nord de la Tunisie, à une soixantaine de kilomètres au sud-ouest de Tunis, près de l'actuelle ville d'El Fahs. On peut admirer ses ruines depuis les rives de l'oued Miliane à Henchir Kasbat.
Identifié au milieu du XIXe siècle, les fouilles y sont restées incomplètes malgré plusieurs campagnes qui ont livré un matériel important déposé au musée national du Bardo, notamment des mosaïques et les fragments d'une statue colossale de Jupiter.
De par ces fouilles inachevées, en dépit de vestiges importants, en particulier ceux du Capitole, une grande partie des quarante hectares du site reste à dégager.

Localisation
Située à 65 kilomètres de Carthage et à une faible distance d'Oudna, la cité présente le double avantage d'être localisée dans une riche région céréalière et au carrefour de routes commerciales. Elle est également située entre l'ancienne Bagrada et l'oued Miliane, à flanc de coteau.

Histoire
De la localité libyco-punique à la cité romaine
Elle devient un chef-lieu de district (pagus autant que civitas) en 27 av. J.-C., sous le règne de l'empereur Auguste. On suppose que l'endroit était déjà habité auparavant par les Berbères puis, de manière assurée, par les phénico-puniques de par la place des cultes des deux divinités principales à l'époque postérieure : Saturne reprend le culte de Ba'al Hammon et Junon Caelestis reprend le culte d'Astarté.
En 128, sous le règne d'Hadrien, la ville obtient le droit de cité (municipe) et parvient à maturité entre 150 et 250. Sa prospérité repose alors essentiellement sur le commerce entre l'intérieur des terres et les villes côtières. Selon les estimations, la ville compte à cette époque entre 7 000 et 12 000 habitants. L'empereur Commode octroie à la ville, rebaptisée Colonia Julia Aurelia Commoda, le statut de colonie romaine en 188. L'intégration à l'empire et la prospérité permettent à la cité de se parer d'édifices publics.
La cité commence à décliner vers la fin du IIIe siècle. L'empereur Constantin tente de revivifier l'agglomération qui compte alors encore 1 000 habitants. Renommée Res Publica Felix Thuburbo Majus, elle reçoit une nouvelle impulsion sous le règne de Constance II qui poursuit une politique de reconstruction, en particulier des thermes.
Elle entre cependant à nouveau en déclin sous le coups des invasions vandales et des combattants arabes qui propagent l'islam de village en village. La colonie est fortement endommagée par un tremblement de terre.

Évêché
La ville devient par la suite un évêché, siège du diocèse de Thuburbo Majus suffragant de l'archidiocèse de Carthage, dont on connaît au moins quatre évêques : Sedatus qui prit part au concile de Carthage (256), Faustus qui prit part au concile d'Arles (314), saint Cyprien qui participa au concile des Églises de Carthage (412), au cours duquel il s'opposa au donatiste Rufinus, et Bennatus qui fut banni sous le règne d'Hunéric (484).
L'Église catholique le reconnaît aujourd'hui comme un évêché in partibus.

Redécouverte du site
C'est seulement en 1857 que l'archéologue français Charles-Joseph Tissot arrache la ville de l'oubli. Les fouilles sont reprises en 1912 puis vers 1930, sous l'impulsion de Louis Poinssot, et enfin en 1957. L'essentiel des fouilles est effectué de 1912 à 1936. Un siècle et demi après sa découverte, les fouilles sont encore inachevées en raison de l'ampleur du site.

Édifices
De nos jours, en dépit du caractère partiel des fouilles effectuées, et de par l'importance de ses ruines, elle constitue l'un des plus beaux sites archéologiques de Tunisie.

Les bâtiments dégagés, outre le Capitole, sont relativement modestes, ce caractère étant à relier aux faibles ressources des habitants.
De même, les temples ont été transformés en églises à l'époque romaine, aucune construction religieuse nouvelle n'ayant alors été entreprise.

Édifices religieux
De son Capitole daté de 168, quatre impressionnantes colonnes corinthiennes de 8,50 mètres ont survécu sur les 6 de la façade initiale à l'épreuve du temps et ont été redressées. La taille de la construction est comparable à celle du Capitole de Dougga, derrière lequel il se situe de par son état de conservation. Les fouilles ont également livré les fragments de la statue colossale située au musée national du Bardo à Tunis, ainsi que trois favissæ.
Le temple de Mercure, consacré en 211, se situe sur son côté nord-ouest, et possède un péristyle circulaire possédant huit colonnes. La proximité de la construction avec le forum suit les préconisations de Vitruve. On y trouve aussi deux sanctuaires consacrés à Saturne, dont l'un possède un plan de type oriental et aurait été bâti aux IIe ou Ier siècle av. J.-C.. Ce dernier sanctuaire, comme ceux de Mercure et de Junon Caelestis, a été utilisé comme église au VIe siècle

L'un des temples de Saturne a été bâti en hauteur. On y trouve également un « temple de Baalat », possédant un plan fréquent en Afrique, avec une cour outre le temple stricto sensu qui a été par la suite transformé en basilique chrétienne.

Édifices civils
En contrebas du temple s'étend un forum carré à péristyle de 45 mètres de côté, édifié au IIe siècle et restauré au IVe siècle, bordé sur trois côtés par des portiques et le Capitole. On y accède par deux portes de petites dimensions sur ses côtés sud-ouest et sud-est.
À proximité se trouvent les vestiges de la curie, dont l'aménagement intérieur a pu être restitué, avec ses gradins et son estrade.
On peut également y voir un macellum (marché), place dont les côtés possèdent des boutiques.

Édifices de loisirs
Au sud-ouest du site, les vestiges des thermes d'hiver et d'été, avec de remarquables mosaïques, témoignent de l'architecture des bains de l'époque romaine.
Les « thermes d'hiver », s'étendant sur 1 600 m2, ont été construits à une date mal assurée, dans la seconde moitié du IIe siècle ou au début du IIIe siècle. Le complexe thermal a été rénové entre 395 et 408, une autre rénovation ayant eu lieu à une époque tardive indéterminée. La construction est encore utilisée à la fin du Ve siècle ou au début du VIe siècle. Doté de trois piscines, le frigidarium ne mesurait cependant qu'environ 70 m2. Deux des piscines ont été supprimées, peut-être au Ve siècle alors qu'une aile adjointe à la même époque est considérée par Yvon Thébert comme un espace consacré aux réunions.
Les « thermes d'été », à proximité immédiate du forum, étaient très richement ornés. À proximité se trouvent des latrines. Ils ont été construits à la fin du IIe ou au début du IIIe siècle. L'édifice, s'étendant sur 2 800 m2, avec un frigidarium de 125 m2, est à considérer comme un édifice de taille moyenne. L'ensemble a subi de nombreux remaniements non datables mais a été restauré de façon assurée en 361. Il a existé un débat entre archéologues à propos de l'imbrication des divers éléments de la zone, et des incidences des constructions de la palestre des Petronii et des grandes latrines semi-circulaires sur l'espace thermal, en particulier les accès qui ont dû changer lors des divers bouleversements.

Située au nord-est des « thermes d'été », la palestre offerte par les Petronii à la ville en 225 était destinée à la pratique du sport. Proche de la palestre a été découvert un bas-relief représentant des ménades en train de danser, ce qui illustre l'imitation de modèles classiques dès le Ier siècle. L'un des côtés de l'édifice a fait l'objet d'un remontage, ce qui en fait un des atouts du site, les autres façades étant dans un état de ruines avancé.
L'orientation des salles chaudes des thermes a permis l'identification des deux lieux à l'usage lié à la saison : salles chaudes au nord pour les thermes d'été, au sud pour les thermes d'hiver. Le site possédait d'autres installations thermales, les « thermes du labyrinthe », les « thermes du Capitole », outre des thermes situés dans la « maison aux communs ».
Thuburbo Majus accueille par ailleurs un amphithéâtre qui prenait appui sur le relief et qui n'est pas encore totalement dégagé.

Quartiers d'habitations
L'habitat privé a été moins l'objet de fouilles que les monuments publics ou religieux. Cependant, environ une vingtaine de maisons privées ont été dégagées.
Les constructions privées, de par la dureté du matériau local, étaient bâties de béton de plâtre.
Les archéologues ont pu déterminer que les classes aisées vivaient dans le quartier occidental de la cité, le quartier septentrional abritant des classes davantage populaires du fait de la proximité d'installations artisanales, en particulier des huileries.
À proximité du forum ont été retrouvées des habitations luxueuses, au sol recouvert de mosaïques et de marbre, certaines possédant un système de chauffage.

Découvertes effectuées sur le site
Œuvres in situ
Les fouilles qui ont eu lieu sur le site sont datées d'une période où la dépose des œuvres était une pratique courante. De ce fait, le site est relativement dépouillé. Cependant, on trouve tout de même un petit musée sur le site.

Œuvres déposées au musée national du Bardo
Les découvertes les plus remarquables ont été déposées au musée national du Bardo. Parmi celles-ci, on trouve une tête, mesurant 1,35 mètre pour 1,2 tonne, d'une statue de Jupiter atteignant sept mètres de hauteur, ainsi que des mosaïques.
Un naïskos de la première moitié du IIe siècle av. J.-C.., chapelle miniature dédiée à Déméter, retrouvé sur le site est selon Serge Lancel un résumé du temple de basse-époque punique, une synthèse de l'art grec avec une origine orientale.

Dans la salle dite du Mausolée sont exposées diverses mosaïques livrées par le site, dont celle des protomés d'animaux d'amphithéâtre : cette mosaïque, datée de la seconde moitié du IVe siècle, avait une finalité commémorative pour rappeler un spectacle offert par un riche notable. L'œuvre appartient à une série tardive où le motif végétal est très présent.

D'autres mosaïques sont situées ailleurs dans le musée. Ainsi, la mosaïque dite du poète tragique absorbé dans une profonde réflexion est datée de la fin du IIe siècle et montre le poète — identifié parfois à Ménandre — en pleine réflexion, placé au milieu d'un décor de feuillages. Un parchemin à la main, il a face à lui deux masques de théâtre. Le musée possède également une représentation des noces de Dionysos et d'Ariane où sont mis en scène les amours de Dionysos sur trois registres. Sur le registre supérieur le dieu, assis sur une peau de panthère, a face à lui Ariane. Le décor, inscrit dans un triangle, est selon Mohamed Yacoub à relier à un « décor conçu pour un fronton de temple ». Les deux registres inférieurs concernent les compagnons de la divinité, l'un Héraclès face à un satyre et l'autre des Bacchantes accompagnées du dieu Pan. La scène se retrouve sur les cratères retrouvés lors des fouilles de l'épave de Mahdia.
L'œuvre dite Thésée et le Minotaure, datée de la fin du IIIe siècle, figure le combat final où Thésée s'apprête à frapper la tête du Minotaure, dont les membres des victimes jonchent le sol. L'entourage de l'emblema figure le labyrinthe. On y trouve aussi un bassin avec tête d'Océan avec xenia ou plutôt une mosaïque de bassin, avec décor de monstres marins, dont le rebord est occupé par des motifs de xenia ou natures mortes, symbole de fécondité. La vie quotidienne est également représentée avec une mosaïque de chasse à courre, malheureusement très mutilée, datant du IVe siècle. Sur les deux registres conservés figurent deux personnages à cheval poursuivant un lièvre, accompagnés d'auxiliaires et d'une chienne ; les chevaux et la chienne sont nommés.
Le sport est représenté dans les pugilistes aux prises, une mosaïque de la fin du IIIe siècle où deux pugilistes portant des gants se battent alors que, de la tête de celui de gauche, coule du sang. Les jeux sont aussi présents avec un aurige vainqueur, emblema malheureusement mutilé d'une mosaïque du début du IVe siècle figurant un aurige portant d'une main une couronne et tenant de l'autre une palme, les rênes du quadrige étant fixés à son corps.

Références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
: document utilisé comme source pour la rédaction de cet article.

Bibliographie sur Thuburbo Majus
(en) Marc Kleijwegt, « Beans, baths and the barber... A sacred law from Thuburbos Maius », Antiquités africaines, t. 30,‎ 1994, p. 209-220 (ISSN 0066-4871, lire en ligne, consulté le 9 octobre 2023).

Bibliographie générale
Aïcha Ben Abed-Ben Khedher, Le musée du Bardo, Tunis, Cérès, 1992 (ISBN 997370083X). .
Claude Briand-Ponsart et Christophe Hugoniot, L'Afrique romaine : de l'Atlantique à la Tripolitaine, 146 av. J.-C. - 533 apr. J.-C., Paris, Armand Colin, 2005, 569 p. (ISBN 978-2200268381).
Paul Corbier et Marc Griesheimer, L'Afrique romaine : 146 av. J.-C. - 439 apr. J.-C., Paris, Ellipses, 2005, 432 p. (ISBN 978-2729824419)
Jean-Claude Golvin, L'Antiquité retrouvée, Paris, Errance, 2003, 191 p. (ISBN 978-2877722667). .
Pierre Gros, L'architecture romaine du début du IIIe siècle av. J.-C. à la fin du Haut-Empire, t. 1 : monuments publics, Paris, Picard, 1996, 503 p. (ISBN 978-2708405004). .
Christophe Hugoniot, Rome en Afrique : de la chute de Carthage aux débuts de la conquête arabe, Paris, Flammarion, 2000, 349 p. (ISBN 978-2080830036).
André Laronde et Jean-Claude Golvin, L'Afrique antique, Paris, Taillandier, 2001, 224 p. (ISBN 978-2235023139). .
Yann Le Bohec, Histoire de l'Afrique romaine, Paris, Picard, 2005, 282 p. (ISBN 978-2708407510). .
Edward Lipinski (dir.), Dictionnaire de la civilisation phénicienne et punique, Turnhout, Brepols, 1992, 502 p. (ISBN 978-2503500331). .
Ammar Mahjoubi, Villes et structures de la province romaine d'Afrique, Tunis, Centre de publication universitaire, 2000, 271 p. (ISBN 978-9973937957).
Hédi Slim et Nicolas Fauqué, La Tunisie antique : de Hannibal à saint Augustin, Paris, Mengès, 2001, 259 p. (ISBN 978-2856204214). .
Yvon Thébert, Thermes romains d'Afrique du Nord et leur contexte méditerranéen : études d'histoire et d'archéologie, Rome, École française de Rome, 2003, 733 p. (ISBN 978-2728303984). .
Mohamed Yacoub, Splendeurs des mosaïques de Tunisie, Tunis, Agence nationale du patrimoine, 1995, 420 p. (ISBN 978-9973917232). .
Collectif, La Tunisie : carrefour du monde antique, Dijon, Faton, 1995 (ISBN 978-2878440201).
Collectif, L'Afrique romaine : 69-439, Neuilly-sur-Seine, Atlande, 2006, 383 p. (ISBN 978-2350300023). .

Articles connexes
Civilisation carthaginoise
Afrique romaine

Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire  

(en) « Plan du site antique de Thuburbo Majus » [image], sur mfortunato.it (consulté le 9 octobre 2023).

 Portail de l’archéologie   Portail de la Rome antique   Portail de la Tunisie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
SBEITLA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:56:16


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 917
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sbeitla
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sbeitla (Arabic: سبيطلة ) is a small town in west-central Tunisia. Nearby are the Roman ruins of Sufetula, containing the best preserved Roman forum temples in the country. It was the entry point of the Muslim conquest of North Africa.
Sbeitla is the capital of the largest delegation in Kasserine Governorate with an area of 1133.5 km2. It is located in 33 km in the west of the governorate, and 264 km to Tunis. It has a population of 23,844 (2014 estimate). Sbeitla is mentioned in Norman Douglas's Fountains in the Sand as being wooded by junipers and Aleppo pines as late as the 19th century, though he found them "bleak and bare" in the early 20th century.

History
The oldest traces of civilisation in the zone are Punic megaliths and funereal stelae.
The region was inhabited by nomadic tribes until the Legio III Augusta established a camp at Ammaedara. Through the surrender of the Berber leader Tacfarinas, the region was pacified and populated under the Roman emperor Vespasian and his sons between 67 and 69, becoming a bishopric in the Roman province of Byzacena.
Some inscriptions found in the city suggest that the settlement had success along the lines of others in North Africa during the 2nd century, reaching great prosperity through the olive industry, whose cultivation benefited from excellent climatic conditions in the region. The olive presses found in the ruins of the city further bolster this conclusion. The resulting prosperity made possible the construction of a splendid forum and other important buildings.
The city began to decline during the Late Empire, during which the city was surrounded and occupied by Vandals, a fact that is demonstrated by the appearance of temples dedicated to their gods.
The arrival of the Byzantines inaugurated a new period of splendor. In 647, the fields before the city were the site of a major battle between the Byzantines and Berbers of Gregory the Patrician and the Rashidun Caliphate's governor of Egypt, Abdullah ibn Saad. The Battle of Sufetula ended in a decisive Muslim victory, which shook Byzantine control over the region and signalled the beginning of the Muslim conquest of North Africa.

The caliph at the time of the battle was Uthman ibn Affan, who set the army under the leadership of Abdullah ibn Saad. At his arrival to Barqa, Uqba ibn Nafi and his troops joined the main army and the two commanders prepared together the plan to conquer Sbeitla. The battle was long and hard, and Caliph Uthman sent reinforcement under the leadership of Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr. The three leaders prepared a new battle plan and they finally succeeded in taking Sufetula.
The Muslim conquest marked the end of the diocese of Sufetula, which was however nominally revived as a Catholic titular bishopric.

Geography
Sbeitla is located in western central Tunisia. By road it is 33 kilometres (29 mi) north-east of Kasserine, 246 kilometres (180 mi) south-west of Tunis, and 166 kilometres (141 mi) south-west of Sousse. The city is known by its semi-arid climate.

Culture
Thanks to the well preserved archaeological site with its prestigious Roman forum, the cultural activities in Sbeitla have prospered. An annual festival is organised in the forum.

Museums
The archaeological museum of Sbeitla houses several sculptures and mosaics. It consists of three exhibition rooms: the first one is about the Capsian culture, the second about the rest of Dionysus' empire, and the third contains two mosaics.

Festivals
Since 2000, the city holds its Spring International festival each year, it is an international celebration where many famous actors like Mahmoud Yacine and authors like Mahmoud Messadi were honored. The city celebrates also its international festival named also festival abadelah of Sbeitla. It was founded in 2000, and it became international in 2013.

Economy
The economy of Sbeitla relays on handicraft, agricultural and petroleum production managed by ETAP in the oil field of Douleb.
Smuggling goods and oil from Algerian Borders represent a major parallel economy activity in the region.

Agricultural
The city is surrounded by a large field of agriculture of olive, almond and animal husbandry. It contains 919 shallow wells, 137 deep wells, a mountain lake and a mountain dam the irrigated Area remains limited to 2930 hectares.

Petroleum industries
The Oil field of Douleb is one of the fields explored by ETAP, since April 12, 1968 and it produces 230 000 barrels\year. In 1974, the field reached it maximal productivity with 1200m3 per day.

Handicraft
The majority of handicraft known in Sbeitla relay on wool processing. Tunisian barnous is one of those handcrafts.

Sports
Sbeitla's most popular sport club is Union Sportive Sbeitla also known as USS, the club plays in the Tunisian ligue professionnelle 3 before being promoted to ligue 2 in the 2013 season .
The team currently plays in the Third Tunisian League. 
On June 5, 2013, the club advanced to the Quarter-finals of Tunisian Cup for the first time in its history. After defeating Stade Tunisien, the club was eliminated by CA Bizertin.

Notable people
Ali Ben Ghedhahem (1814 - October 10, 1867) a famous Tunisian revolutionary.
Mongi Soussi Zarrouki (February 24, 1936 – May 26, 2000) is an athlete who participated in 1960 Summer Olympics and in the 1959 Mediterranean Games.
Lotfi Ben Jeddou (July 31, 1964) is a politician who was the Minister of the Interior from March 2013 to february 2015.

See also
Sufetula (see), the former Catholic bishopric turned titular see

References
External links
Lexicorient Archived 2012-01-14 at the Wayback Machine


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 2,555
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%B3%D8%A8%D9%8A%D8%B7%D9%84%D8%A9
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

سبيطلة (وردت في بعض الكتب باسم سفيطلة) هي مدينة في وسط غربي تونس، ومركز معتمدية سبيطلة بولاية القصرين. في 21 جوان 1956، كانت المدينة مركز ولاية سبيطلة قبل تغيير مركز الولاية إلى القصرين ومعه تغير اسم الولاية. يبلغ عدد سكان سبيطلة 20,253 ساكن حسب إحصائيات سنة 2004. وتشتهر بموقعها الأثري الذي يجسِّد تعاقب الحضارات النوميدية والرومانية والبيزنطية عليها، كما أنها نقطة انطلاق الفتح الإسلامي لشمال أفريقيا وما يليه ومسرح صراع الجيش الأمريكي وجيش ألمانيا النازية أثناء ما يعرف بمعركة القصرين في الحرب العالمية الثانية. تعد المدينة إحدى أهم الجهات المنتجة للنفط والماء في تونس.

التأسيس
غالب الاحتمال أن مدينة سفيطلة الرومانية تأسست في نفس الفترة التي ظهرت فيها حيدرة وسليوم وتلابت بعد أن تمكن الرومان من إخضاع جهة الوسط التي شهدت قبل ذلك ثورة الأمازيغي تاكفاريناس. إنَّ أقدم الآثار في المدينة إلى حد الكشوفات الحالية تعود إلى عهد الإمبراطور الروماني فلافيوس فسباسيانوس الذي دام حكمه من سنة 69 إلى 79 ميلادي.

التاريخ
كانت عاصمة دولة أمازيغية كاثوليكية تابعة لروما ثم للقسطنطينية فتحها عبد الله بن أبي السرح في غزوة شارك فيها سبعة قادة يسمى كل منهم عبد الله فأطلق على تلك الغزوة حملة العبادلة السبعة التي قتل فيها عبد الله بن الزبير الملك جرجير لتفتح البلاد للمسلمين تماما. بها آثار رومانية وبيزنطية كثيرة وتتميز باحتوائها لمعبد الثالوث المقدس عند الرومان فينوس وجوبيتر.

التاريخ الروماني والبيزنطي
كان يسكن المدينة قبائل رُحل حتى قدم الفيلق الروماني ليجيو أوغوستا الثالث وتأسيسه لمخيم في أميدرة. ومع استسلام زعيم الأمازيغ تاكفاريناس، وقع تأمين المدينة وتعميرها في فترة حكم الإمبراطور فلافيوس فسباسيانوس وإبنه في الفترة الممتدة بين 67 و 69. وتثبت الآثار المتبقية أن المدينة عاشت فترة طويلة من الازدهار طوال القرن الثاني، تجلت في ازدهار إنتاج الزيتون دعمه العامل المناخي الملائم لهذه الزراعة في الجهة. كما دعم العثور على آثار معاصر لزيت الزيتون خلاصة هذا الازدهار، الذي دعم تشيد المباني الهامة والمنتديات الكبيرة.
شهدت المدينة تراجع في أواخر الإمبراطورية، انتهت بمحاصرتها واحتلالها من قبل الوندال، وهو ما تجسد في وجود معابد مخصصة لآلهة الأمازيغ. عرفت المدينة فترة جديدة من العظمة والازدهار بقدوم البيزنطيين. بلغ عدد سكان سفيطلة، التي كان مفترق طرق تجاري هام في قلب بيزنطة، عشرات الآلاف نسمة. وهي إحصائيات تقديرية اعتمدت على مساحة الموقع الأثري، وقنوات تدفق المياه التي تزود المدينة، والقادرة على نقل 13 ألف متر مكعب في اليوم. وفي 647، كانت المدينة مسرح معركة كبيرة بين الأمازيغ والبيزنطيين والخلفاء الراشدون.

التاريخ الإسلامي
إنطلق التاريخ الإسلامي لمدينة سبيطلة بعد الفتوحات الإسلامية تحت خلافة عثمان بن عفان، في ما يسمى بحملة العبادلة السبعة. وذكرها لاحقا المؤرخون والجغرافيون المسلمون كالإدريسي وأبو العباس اليعقوبي وغيرهم. حيث قال فيها صاحب معجم الأعلام: «سُبَيْطِلَة: بضم أوله وفتح ثانيه وياءٍ مثناة من تحت وطاءٍ مكسورة ولام، مدينة من مُدُن إفريقية وهي كما يزعمون مدينة جرجير الملك الرومي وبينها وبين القيروان سبعون ميلاً». كما ذكرها الإدريسي في كتابه نزهة المشتاق في اختراق الآفاق بقوله: «وإذ قد انتهى بنا القول في ذكر بلاد إفريقية فلنرجع الآن إلى ذكر بلاد نفزاوة فنقول إن مدينة سبيطلة كانت مدينة جرجير ملك الروم الأفارقة وكانت من أحسن البلاد منظراً وأكبرها قطراً وأكثرها مياهاً وأعدلها هواء وأطيبه ثرى وكانت بها بساتين وجنات وافتتحها المسلمون في صدر الإسلام وقتلوا بها ملكها العظيم المسمى جرجيس ومنها إلى مدينة قفصة مرحلة وبعض ومنها أيضاً إلى القيروان سبعون ميلاً».
وفي كتاب البلدان لأبي العباس اليعقوبي ذُكِرت سبيطلة على أنها «المدينة القديمة العظمى هي التي يقال لها سبيطلة، وهي التي افتتحت في أيام عثمان بن عفان، وحصرها عبد الله بن عمر بن الخطاب، وعبد الله بن الزبير، وأمير الجيش عبد الله بن سعد بن أبي سرح سنة سبع وثلاثين».
أما الحميري فقد ذكر المدينة في كتابه الروض المعطار في خبر الأقطار كالتالي: «وكان عبد الله بن سعد بن أبي سرح لما بعثه عثمان إلى أفريقيا غازياً لقي جرجير صاحب سبيطلة، وقاتله فقتله عبد الله بن الزبير وشن الغارات على سبيطلة، وأصاب الروم رعب شديد، ولجأوا إلى الحصون والقلاع، فاجتمع أكثر الروم بقصر الأجم فطلبوا من عبد الله بن سعد أن يأخذ منهم ثلاثمائة قنطار من ذهب على أن يكف عنهم ويخرج من بلادهم، فقبل ذلك منهم وقبض المال، وكان في شرطه أن ما أصاب المسلمون قبل الصلح فهو لهم وما أصابوه بعد الصلح ردوه لهم». فيها الجمال بكثرة
ويضيف نفس المصدر: "هي مدينة قمودة، على سبعين ميلاً من القيروان، وقال عريب: على مسافة يومين من القيروان، قال اليعقوبي: وهو بلد واسع فيه مدن وحصون، والمدينة القديمة العظمى هي التي يقال لها سبيطلة.

العبادلة السبعة
استأذن عمرو بن العاص والي مصر في عهد الخليفة عمر بن الخطاب في فتح أفريقيا، إلا أنَّ الخليفة لم يستجب لطلبه. وقد أراد من وراء ذلك أن يثبِّت أقدام المسلمين في مصر وطرابلس، فلمَّا كان عهد الخليفة الراشدي عثمان بن عفان أجاب واليه على مصر، الذي تقدم بنفس الطلب، فأُوكِلَت إليه مهمَّة هذه الحملة، وانتقى الخليفة من المدينة خيرة أبناء الصحابة منهم:

ولذلك تُعرَف الحملة أيضًا بغزوة العبادلة السبعة. وهي معركة قامت ما بين المسلمين والروم في القرن الهجري الأول في عهد الخليفة عثمان بن عفان، وقد انتصر المسلمون فيها انتصارًا ساحقًا على الروم، حيث ذكر بعض المؤرخين أن عبد الله بن سعد غزا إفريقية في جماعة من الصحابة، فلقي جرجيرًا في سُبيطلة، وهي مدينة على سبعين ميلًا من القيروان، فقتل جرْجيرًا وهو في مائة ألف، وصالح ابن أبي سرحٍ أهل الحصون وأهل المدائن على مائة ألف رطل من الذهب.
في القرن العشرين، كانت مدينة سبيطلة من المدن التونسية التي وقعت تحت سيطرة الفوج 66 للمشاة الفرنسية، إثر إنزال سريته الأولى في القصبة في تونس العاصمة في 10 سبتمبر 1881.

الحرب العالمية الثانية
عاشت سبيطلة مثل مختلف مدن ولاية القصرين مواجهات بين جيش ألمانيا النازية والجيش الأمريكي أثناء الحرب العالمية الثانية في شمال أفريقيا في ما يعرف بحملة تونس، تحت قيادة الجنرال الألماني إرفين رومل من ناحية والجنرال الأمريكي لويد فردندال من ناحية أخرى. دارت أحداث هذا الصراع في ما يعرف بمعركة القصرين بين التاسع عشر والخامس والعشرين فيفري 1943. في 16 فيفري 1943، وبعد فوزهم على الجيش الأمريكي، هاجمت فرق البانزر 21 للجيش الألماني سبيطلة.

الثورة التونسية
أثناء الثورة التونسية، شهدت مدينة سبيطلة احتجاجات واسعة ومصادمات مع الأمن حتى تاريخ هروب الرئيس التونسي السابق زين العابدين بن علي. وفي شهر جويلية من نفس السنة، كانت المدينة مسرحا لأعمال عنف دارت بين أهالي المدينة وقبيلة الهرارة من أحد الأرياف المجاورة. وأدت أعمال العنف إلى جرح 17 شخصا، ولم يُحسم النزاع إلا بتدخل الجيش من ثكنة الهادي خفشة التابعة للمدينة، وأعلنت على إثرها وزارة الداخلية حالة حظر تجول في المدينة. بعد الثورة، شهدت المدينة العديد من الاحتجاجات وتدخلات للأمن.
على إثر نتائج الانتخابات الرئاسية التونسية 2014 شهدت مدينة سبيطلة مثل بعض مدن الجنوب احتجاجات تمركزت أساسا في حي السرور. كما حاول المحتجين حرق مقر الحزب نداء تونس، وأدت الاحتجاجات إلى تدخل الجيش لحماية المؤسسات الحكومية.

الجغرافيا
مدينة سبيطلة هي مركز معتمدية سبيطلة التي تمتد على مساحة 1133.5 كلم2. وتبعد المدينة عن مركز ولاية القصرين التابعة لها مسافة 32.7 كلم، عبر الطريق الوطنية رقم 13. و260 كلم عن تونس العاصمة.

خصائص التربة والمناخ
تتكون أراضي سبيطلة بصفة عامة من أراضٍ خصبة دوبالية، وأراضي تراسبات، وأراضٍ دوبالية عضوية، وأراضٍ كلسية. كما تتميز كأغلب مناطق الجهة بمناخ شبه جاف.

النقل
تعتمد مدينة سبيطلة بالأساس على الخواص عبر سيارات الأجرة اللواج  للنقل بين المدن، وبنسبة أقل على الشركة الجهوية للنقل بالقصرين مدعومة بالشركة الوطنية للنقل بين المدن. في حين تتكفل شبكة من سيارات تاكسي بتيسير التنقل في المدينة.
كما ترتبط مدينة سبيطلة بشبكة السكك الحديدية منذ مطلع القرن الفارط. حيث قامت شركة بون-قالمة للسكك الحديدية بفتح الخط سبيطلة-جلمة في 15 جوان 1908، ويمتد على طول 28.2 كيلومتر، والخط سبيطلة-القصرين-هنشير السواطير في غرّة ديسمبر 1909، والذي يتمد على طول 124 كيلومتر.

التوزع الديمغرافي
تنقسم معتمدية سبيطلة إلى 14 عمادة وفي ما يلي توزع السكان والأسر والمساكن في مدينة سبيطلة حسب إحصائيات سنة 2004. ويعتبر حي السرور بشقيه الشرقي والغربي أكثر المناطق العمرانية اكتظاظًا بالسكان، رغم تهميشه، خاصة من ناحية البنية التحتية والخدمات.

الاقتصاد
يتركز في مدينة سبيطلة معمل الورق الرهيف الذي يعد المصدر الأول لهذا المنتوج في تونس، بالإضافة إلى إنتاجها المتميز للزيتون واللوز. وبالرغم من وفرة الموارد المائية في معتمدية سبيطلة، فإن المساحات السقوية بقيت محدودة ولا تتعدى 2930 هكتار.

النفط والموارد المائية
سبيطلة هي إحدى أكبر الجهات المنتجة للنفط، بل وكذلك الماء. منذ عدة سنوات ظلت منطقة سبيطلة تضخُّ هاتين المادتين الحيويتين انطلاقا من حقل الدولاب ومن عيونها السطحية والعميقة عبر قنوات تمتدّ إلى صفاقس، وبالرغم من ذلك لا يوجد مسبح بلدي في المدينة.

يقع حقل الدولاب وصمامة في معتمدية سبيطلة من ولاية القصرين على بعد قرابة 40 كيلومترًا شمال مدينة القصرين، في منطقة جبلية ارتفاعها 1000 متر، وهو تحت إشراف شركة البحث عن النفط واستغلاله بالبلاد التونسية. إنطلق الإنتاج في حقل الدولاب في 12 أفريل 1968 وينتج 230,000 برميل سنويًّا، وبلغت الكمية القصوى المنتجة سنة 1974، 1200 متر مكعب يوميًّا. يتكون الحقل من:

4 آبار منتجة بالدولوميت مجهزة بمضخات كهربائية مغمورة.
4 آبار منتجة بالكلس مجهزة بمضخات متأرجحة.
3 آبار منتجة بالصخر الفيراكوني مجهزة بمضخات متأرجحة.
1 بئر للحقن بالكلس.
1 بئر للحقن بدولوميت مياه الإنتاج.
وتحيط بمدينة سبيطلة غابات من شجر الزيتون واللوز، وبها أربعة معاصر لزيت الزيتون.

الصناعات التقليدية
مثل باقي مدن الوسط الغربي، تنتشر في سبيطلة تربية الماشية وهو ما يوفر إنتاجية مرتفعة للصوف والصناعات التقليدية المرتكزة على هذه المادة مثل صناعة الزربية والبطانية والبرنوس. وهي صناعات تقليدية منتشرة نظرًا لقلَّة تكلفتها، وتوفِّر مورد رزق للعديد من سكان المنطقة.

السياحة
تعتبر سبيطلة من أشهر المدن الأثرية في تونس نظرًا لتعاقب الحضارات عليها، وساهم موقعها الأثري بالإضافة إلى مهرجانيها الدولين السنوين ومركبها السياحي الكابيتول في تنشيط الحركة السياحية وإستقطاب أعداد متزايدة من الزائرين الأجانب. وفي 21 جانفي 2015، تنظم ملتقى البلديات السياحية والمندوبين الجهويين للسياحة من أجل محيط نظيف. أشرف عليه كل من لطفي بن جدو وزير الدّاخلية وأمال كربول وزيرة السياحة، وفازت فيه بلدية سبيطلة بجائزة بقيمة 50 ألف دينار. وهو تكريم من شأنه دعم النشاط السياحي في المدينة.

الموقع الأثري
هو أول موقع مزود بإضاءة حركية وبمنظومة إرشادات متكاملة.هو أول موقع مزود بإضاءة حركية وبمنظومة إرشادات متكاملة. ويضم العديد من الآثار الرومانية والبيزنطية التي وقع ترميم أغلبها، وهي تحت رعاية المعهد الوطني للتراث، الذي يشرف في مدينة سبيطلة على 12 من مجموع البناءات الأثرية المدرجة في ولاية القصرين.
ويُعتبر قوس دقلديانوس المعلم الأثري المميز للمدينة وهو قوس النصر تم تشيده كهدية لأباطرة الرباعي الأول في الحقبة الرومانية. والذي أسسه الإمبراطور الروماني ديوكلتيانوس، في أواخر القرن الثالث لمجابهة هجمات الأمازيغ المتكررة والتي يصعب مواجهتها من قبل رجل واحد. عُرف الرباعي الأول بهيمنة ديوكلتيانوس لذلك سمي هذا المعلم الأثري باسمه.

الآثار الرومانية
قوس ديوكلتيانوس
الحمّامات العمومية
الآثار البيزنطية
كنيسة بيلاتور
كنيسة فيتاليس
كنيسة جيكوندوس
كنيسة سرفوس
كنيسة القديس جيرفاس، بروتاز وتريفون.

المتحف الأثري
يشتمل متحف سبيطلة على أربع قاعات عرضت داخلها قطع أثرية تصوِّر مختلف جوانب الحياة اليومية منذ عصر ما قبل التاريخ إلى التاريخ الإسلامي، كما توجد فيه صور شمسية تمثل مواقع أو معالم موجودة بالمنطقة.

الثقافة
المهرجانات
تتميز مدينة سبيطلة بنشاط ثقافي متميز يهدف للتعريف بها وتوفير أنشطة ترفيهية. من أبرز الفعاليات الثقافية التي تحتفي بها المدينة نجد مهرجان العبادلة الأثري الذي اتخذ صيغته الدولية منذ سنة 2013، ومهرجان ربيع سبيطلة الدولي.

مهرجان العبادلة الأثري الدولي
تأسس المهرجان سنة 1980، واتخذ طابعه الدولي سنة 2013، وبالرغم من ذلك لا يزال المهرجاني يعاني من تقصير وزارة الثقافة، حيث تخصص له ميزانية 80 ألف دينار تونسي. وهو مبلغ غير كاف لتمكين إدارة المهرجان من توفير عروض فرجوية متميزة لجماهير المهرجان، وتكتفي بتقديم عروض في إطار التبادل الثقافي.

مهرجان ربيع سبيطلة
تنتظم بسبيطلة سنويًا فعاليات مهرجان ربيع سبيطلة الدولي من 30 أبريل إلى 3 ماي. ويُعرّف الشاعر عدنان الهلالي مدير سابق ومؤسس مهرجان سبيطلة الدولي على أنه مهرجان أسسه شبّان المدينة حبًّا في مدينتهم، سفيطلة القلعة الغابرة التي كاد يطويها النسيان في العهود الماضية رغم أنها كانت بوابة الفتح العربي الإسلامي في شمال أفريقيا، ومنها دخل العبادلة السبعة إلى بلاد الأمازيغ التي كان يحتلها الروم سنة 647 ميلادية، وهو فكرة لتكريم المدينة تطورت إلى مهرجان له شخصيته وطابعه الخاصّان. وتدور جل فعاليات المهرجان في المسرح الروماني.

عيد الرعاة
كما تحتفل منطقة الوساعية التابعة لمدينة سبيطلة سنويًّا بعيد الرعاة منذ سنة 2011. وهي تظاهرة من تنظيم فريق المركز الثقافي الجبلي بالوساعية، ويتم فيها تكريم الرعاة في أجواء احتفالية. عرفت هذه التظاهرة الفريدة نجاحًا لافتًا في دورتيها السابقتين 2011 و2012، إذ تميَّزت فقراتها بالتلقائية والبساطة التي تطبع حياة الرعاة فكانت سهرات الناي تحت بيوت الشعر والأهازيج الجبلية الأصيلة في الموعد، وخرج الصحافيون والضيوف إلى جبل سمامة مع القطعان، حيث انتظمت احتفاليات رائقة في أغوار الجبل.

التعليم
من أبرز المؤسسات التعليمية الجامعية وأقدمها بسبيطلة المعهد الأعلى لتكوين المعلمين، حيث فتح المعهد أبوابه في 15 سبتمبر 1988 باسم مدرسة ترشيح المعلمين، تم بمقتضى القانون عدد 98 لسنة 1991 والمتعلق بقانون المالية لسنة 1992 وخاصة الفصل 98 منه تحويل اسمه لما يعرف به اليوم. وبلغ عدد طلبته 325 في السنة الدراسية 2003-2004.
ثم تم غلق المعهد وتعويضه بالمعهد العالي للدراسات التطبيقية في الإنسانيات، وهو تابع لجامعة القيروان. تأسَّس المعهد سنة 2007 ويختص في الآداب والعلوم الإنسانية. بلغ عدد طلابه 1200 طالب وطالبة، حسب إحصائيات سنة 2009.
ويساهم المعهد في تنشيط الحركة الثقافية في المدينة، حيث انتظم الملتقى العلمي الدولي الأول حول تعدد الثقافات وحواراتها بقاعة الاجتماعات بالمعهد، وهو أول تظاهرة علمية عالمية تشهدها ولاية القصرين، حيث شارك فيها ضيوف من الجزائر وفرنسا وأمريكا. واختير لهذا الملتقى عنوان تعدد الثقافات وحواراتها. كما توجد بمدينة سبيطلة مدرستان إعداديَّتان وثلاثة معاهد ثانوية ومركز قطاعي لتكوين مهن الخدمات ومركز تكوين مهني للحرف.
تضم المدينة مكتبة العبادلة العمومية، والتي وقع تأسيسها في جوان 2006، وتحتوي على قاعة إعلامية وقاعتي مطالعة تتسع كل منهما لثمانية وأربعون مقعدا.

الرياضة
ينشط في المدينة الاتحاد الرياضي بسبيطلة الذي تأسس سنة 1962. وينتمي إلى بطولة الرابطة الثالثة مجموعة الوسط. ينشط النادي في ملعب سبيطلة وهو متواجد أمام معهد الآثار وقرب الموقع الأثري. وهو ملعب غير معشب ويتكون من مدرج واحد. يترأس الفريق في الموسم الحالي (2013-2014) كريم الهاني ويدربه ونيّس بوزيدي. وتتميز تشكيلة الفريق بقوة خط الهجوم ممَّا جعله يتصدر الترتيب في المجموعة، حتى تمكن من الصعود إلى الرابطة المحترفة الثانية لكرة القدم، والالتحاق بالمجموعة أ.
في 9 جوان 2013 ترشَّح الفريق لأول مرة في تاريخه للمربع الذهبي لكأس تونس بعد إزاحته فريق الملعب التونسي العريق والحائز علي الكأس ست مرات سابقه، حيث تغلَّب عليه بركلات الترجيح في دور الثمانية بعد انتهاء اللقاء بالتعادل بفضل ركلات الترجيح (4-2).
ترشح الاتحاد عدة مرات لنهائيات كأس الرابطة للهواة والبروموسبور دون أن يفوز به. وفي الموسم 2013-2014، ترشح النادي للدور النهائي بعد فوزه على شبيبة سكرة بنتيجة 2-1، ثم فاز للمرة الأولى في تاريخه بالكأس إثر تغلبه على مولدية منوبة في ملعب المنزه، في 25 جوان 2014. انتهت المبارات بالتعادل السلبي مما استوجب الالتجاء إلى الركلات الترجيحية التي كانت نتيجتها لصالح سبيطلة (3-2)، وفاز النادي بمبلغ 40 ألف دينار تونسي.
كما ينشط في المدينة الجمعية النسائية لكرة القدم بسبيطلة، التي تأسست سنة 2003 ولها فرعان كبريات وصغريات وتنشط في الرابطة الثانية وتترأس السيدة رجاء الدريدي ولديها 40 مجازة.
يعاني فريق الجمعية النسائية من عراقيل بالجملة أبرزها غياب كلي للموارد المالية القارة وافتقاره إلى ملعب يمكنه من ممارسة نشاطه في ظروف طيبة وهو ما ساهم في تعطيل مسيرته نحو الصعود إلى الرابطة الأولى كما أن الموارد المالية المتأتية سواء من جامعة كرة القدم أو من وزارة الشباب والرياضة أو من البلدية والولاية متواضعة ولا تفي بالحاجة.
من أبرز نتائج الفريق في كأس تونس لكرة القدم النسائية كانت المرتبة الثالثة بالنسبة للكبريات والثانية بالنسبة للصغريات في بطولة القسم الثاني.

أعلام المدينة
علي بن غذاهم هو ثوري تونسي من قبيلة ماجر بولاية القصرين قاد ثورة ضد الحكومة التونسية سنة 1864.
الأمين المولاهي ولد في 20 أوت 1961 هو جامعي وسياسي تونسي، شغل منصب كاتب الدولة لوزارة الصحة العمومية في حكومة محمد الغنوشي 2 ثم في حكومة الباجي قائد السبسي.
منجي سوسي زروقي ولد في 24 فبراير 1936 هو لاعب قوى سابق تونسي. بطل وطني في الستينات مثل تونس في الألعاب الأولمبية 1960.
لطفي بن جدو وزير الداخلية في حكومة علي العريض.
عدنان الهلالي شاعر وممثل ومؤسس ومدير مهرجان ربيع سبيطلة الدولي.
بن العيد، ولد في 9 يناير 1980 هو مهندس ومبرمج، وكاتب.

المراجع
وصلات خارجية

آثار سبيطلة الرومانية
موقع سبيطلة في دليل مدن العالم


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,683
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sbe%C3%AFtla
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sbeïtla (arabe : سبيطلة ), connue dans l'Antiquité sous le nom de Sufetula, est une ville du centre de la Tunisie. Dépendant du gouvernorat de Kasserine, elle regroupe 24 597 habitants en 2014. Elle est le centre de la délégation du même nom qui s'étale sur une superficie de 1 133,5 km2. Point d'entrée de la conquête de l'Afrique du Nord par les Arabes musulmans, elle est surtout connue pour son important site archéologique dont il subsiste de nombreux vestiges.

Géographie
Sbeïtla est le centre de la délégation du même nom et d'une municipalité qui s'étend sur 113 350 hectares. Située à 260 kilomètres au sud-ouest de Tunis, à 150 kilomètres à l'ouest de Sfax et à 32,7 kilomètres à l'est de Kasserine, elle se trouve sur le parcours de la route nationale 13.

Climat
Le climat de Sbeïtla est semi-aride comme une grande partie du Centre-Ouest de la Tunisie.

Transports
La ville de Sbeïtla est reliée aux villes environnantes par un réseau de louages qui ne cesse de se développer pour assurer la fluidité de la circulation des personnes. La Société nationale de transport interurbain, moins présente, offre aussi le même service. Le transport en commun est assuré par un réseau de taxis.
La ville est desservie aussi par le chemin de fer depuis le 15 juin 1908, date d'ouverture de la ligne Sbeïtla-Jilma qui s'étale sur 28,2 kilomètres, suivie par l'ouverture de la ligne Sbeïtla-Kasserine-Henchir Souatir (124 kilomètres), le 1er décembre 1909. Les travaux sont réalisés par la Compagnie des chemins de fer Bône-Guelma.

Histoire
Antiquité
La ville de Sufetula est fondée par l'empereur romain Vespasien, le fondateur de la dynastie des Flaviens qui règnent sur l'empire de 69 à 96. Les armées romaines viennent de pacifier la région alors en proie aux attaques berbères, et des terres sont attribuées aux vétérans qui peuvent ainsi protéger les frontières des incursions étrangères.

Époque musulmane
À l'époque du calife Othmân ibn Affân, Sbeïtla est le point d'entrée de la conquête de l'Afrique du Nord par les Arabes musulmans, sous la conduite des sept Abdullah — Abd Allah ibn az-Zubayr, Abdullah ibn Abbas, Abdullah ibn Omar, Abdullah ibn Masud, Abdullah ibn Amr ibn al-As, Abdullah ibn Jaafar ibn Abi Talib et Abd Allâh ibn Saad ibn Sarh — qui réussissent à battre le patrice Grégoire, basé à Sufetula et appuyé par les Frexes selon la tradition locale, dans des batailles qui voient en l'an 647 la victoire de la nouvelle religion, ouvrant ainsi une nouvelle page dans l'histoire de la Tunisie en particulier et celle du Nord de l'Afrique en général.
Au XVIIIe siècle, les Fraichiches et les Madjer sont réunis sous la même autorité d'un caïd qui réside à Sbeïtla mais sont séparés et fractionnés après la signature du traité algéro-tunisien de 1821.

Époque française
À la mi-août 1881, des insurgés appartenant aux Hamamas, Fraichiches, Madjers, Ouled Ayar, Ouartanes, Zeghalmas et Ounifas, se réunissent à Sbeïtla pour décider de la marche à suivre face au protectorat français.

Seconde Guerre mondiale
Pendant la Seconde Guerre mondiale, qui s'inscrit en Afrique du Nord dans la campagne de Tunisie, et comme d'autres villes du gouvernorat de Kasserine, Sbeïtla est le théâtre de combats dans ce qu'on appelle la bataille de Kasserine, opposant les États-Unis sous le commandement de Lloyd Fredendall et le Troisième Reich sous le commandement d'Erwin Rommel, et qui a lieu entre le 19 et le 25 février 1943.

Printemps arabe
Début 2011, Sbeïtla connaît des manifestations sanglantes lors de la révolution conduisant à la chute du président Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali. En juillet de la même année, la ville, qui est fortement touchée par le chômage, est le théâtre de violences entre habitants de deux quartiers, la dispute dégénérant en affrontements entre des dizaines de personnes, faisant 17 blessés en deux jours ; ceci conduit à la promulgation par le ministère de l'Intérieur d'un décret de couvre-feu.

Économie
L'économie de Sbeïtla repose principalement sur les activités artisanales, l'agriculture et le tourisme.
La contrebande fait également partie des activités économiques parallèles que des habitants pratiquent.

Industrie
La ville abrite deux modestes zones industrielles. La délégation étant classée en zone de développement régional prioritaire, on accorde aux investisseurs 25 à 30 % de l'investissement global, via un fonds incluant un plafond de 1,5 à deux millions de dinars, ainsi que la prise en charge par l'État de la cotisation patronale au régime légal de la sécurité sociale pendant les dix premières années à partir de la date d'entrée en activité effective, en plus d'autres avantages.

Agriculture
L'agriculture et des produits agroalimentaires, en particulier l'huile d'olive, représentent une part importante de l'économie de la ville. La répartition des sols selon leurs vocations est composée de 58 750 hectares de terres labourables, 40 847 hectares de forêts et d'alfa et 7 196 hectares de parcours, soit un total de 106 793 hectares.
Selon les statistiques de 2008, le taux d'utilisation des superficies irrigables est de 90 % ; les superficies irriguées de la délégation de Sbeïtla atteignent 2 930 hectares sur un total de 3 366 hectares irrigables. 60 % des superficies exploitées sont gérées par des privés.

Tourisme
Grâce à son site archéologique, son complexe touristique et ses hôtels, le tourisme représente une autre part de l'économie locale.

Culture
Musée archéologique
La ville abrite un musée archéologique situé à côté de son site archéologique. Il est constitué de quatre salles exposant des objets archéologiques témoins des différents aspects de la vie quotidienne de la Préhistoire à l'époque chrétienne et musulmane.
Le musée est fermé à partir de janvier 2011, et la ministre de la Culture et de la Sauvegarde du patrimoine Latifa Lakhdar a promis sa réouverture et s'est engagée à allouer les financements nécessaires à la sauvegarde et à la restauration de cet édifice.

Festival international d'Abadla
Sbeïtla célèbre depuis 1980 son festival international d'Abadla, une manifestation culturelle qui, malgré son ancienneté, reste en difficulté en raison des restrictions budgétaires de la part du ministère de la Culture qui lui octroie uniquement la somme de 80 000 dinars. Ce budget ne suffit pas au festival pour garantir à ses spectateurs des grands spectacles ; il se contente donc d'artistes locaux dans le cadre de la coopération culturelle.

Festival international du printemps de Sbeïtla
La ville célèbre aussi depuis 2001 le Festival international du printemps de Sbeïtla, fondé par le poète et acteur Adnen Helali et ses amis, une manifestation culturelle organisée par l'association Founoun Sufetula avec la collaboration du comité culturel local.
Les spectacles du festival se déroulent dans le théâtre de Sbeïtla situé au sein de son site archéologique. Le 30 mars 2014, la treizième édition du festival démarre avec l'organisation de la Marche des fleurs sur l'avenue Habib-Bourguiba, avec une participation des deux rives de la Méditerranée et de l'Amérique latine. L'originalité de cette édition consiste en l'organisation de cette marche qui prévoit la participation d'environ 2 000 jeunes, en provenance des différentes régions de la république, notamment des régions montagneuses.
Cette édition du festival est marquée aussi par la célébration du 150e anniversaire de la révolte du martyr Ali Ben Ghedhahem. D'autres manifestations culturelles ont lieu jusqu'au 6 avril, date de la fin du festival.

Fête des bergers
L'administration du festival soutient aussi la vie culturelle régionale en contribuant régulièrement à la Fête des bergers, une manifestation qui se déroule dans le djebel Semmama près de Sbeïtla. La fête, animée par des chansons pastorales et la poésie des montagnards, sert à rendre hommage aux bergers qui animent la vie de ces campagnes oubliées et à lancer une action de tourisme alternatif qui soit inspirée des spécificités de la région. La troisième édition de la fête a lieu du 25 au 27 avril 2014 dans un climat tendu à la suite des attaques terroristes qui ont eu lieu dans le djebel Chambi. La fête gagne alors un nouveau rôle : peupler la montagne et chasser les terroristes.
En 2015, l'administration du centre culturel de montagne à Semmama, qui gère le festival, maintient le planning de sa quatrième édition malgré les obstacles et les difficultés. Il déroulera les 25 et 26 avril dans un contexte particulier, due à la présence dans la montagne de terroristes. La fête vise également à égayer, pour deux jours, le pied du djebel Semmama sinistré par l'ambiance engendrée par les terroristes.

Sports
La ville est renommée pour son équipe de football, l'Union sportive de Sbeïtla, fondée à Sbeïtla en 1947, et active dans la poule Centre de la Ligue II durant la saison 2014-2015.
Le 9 juin 2013, l'équipe réalise le meilleur exploit de son histoire et la plus grosse surprise des quarts de finale de la coupe de Tunisie en éliminant le Stade tunisien aux tirs au but (4-2) après un match nul (1-1). Le 25 mai 2014, l'équipe garantit son passage en Ligue II après avoir dominé le groupe Centre de la Ligue III et battu le club de Bembla sur un score de 3-0.
Le 25 juin 2014, au stade olympique d'El Menzah, le club remporte la coupe de la Ligue amateur Promosport aux tirs au but (3-2), aux dépens du tenant du titre, le Mouldiet Manouba, la rencontre s'étant achevée lors du temps réglementaire sur un nul (0-0).
L'Association sportive féminine de Sbeïtla, club de football féminin basé dans la ville depuis 1999, est présidé par Ayachi Rebei et joue en Ligue II.

Personnalités
Ali Ben Ghedhahem, né en 1814 et décédé le 10 octobre 1867, dirigeant tribal et révolutionnaire lors de l'insurrection de 1864 ;
Lotfi Ben Jeddou, né le 31 juillet 1964, ministre de l'Intérieur dans les gouvernements Larayedh et Jomaa ;
Adnen Helali, né le 23 mars 1975, poète et acteur ;
Mongi Soussi Zarrouki, né le 24 février 1936, athlète spécialisé en 400 mètres haies et participant aux Jeux olympiques de 1960 ;
Lamine Moulahi, né le 20 août 1961, haut fonctionnaire, professeur et homme politique, PDG de la Pharmacie centrale de Tunisie ;
Chawki Tabib, né le 28 décembre 1963, avocat.

Références
Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire  

 Portail de la Tunisie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 287
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Sbeitla
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Sufetula (or Sbeitla) is a fairly well preserved Roman town in the mid west of Tunisia.

## Get in
The best way to read Sufetula is to take a louage --a shared taxi-- from Kairouan or Kasserine.  Louages seem to run more frequently in the morning, so plan to start early.  Alternatively, it is possible to drive there independently. From Kairouan take the road towards the South West - you will need a road map. In Sbeitla, the Roman town is well signposted; take the right after the bridge beside the petrol station.

## See
The Byzantine House ruins. By climbing up the walls you can see how much they fortified their homes against the Arab invaders, towards the end of their dominance here. There are several with up to 4 feet thick of additional stonework around the original house giving an idea of the terror that had gripped this outpost of the old Empire.
The Forum, which gives a great feeling for the hub of the original city. This has a wonderful entrance arch still standing and three large temples at the far end. The spaces for the traders on the outer walls is clearly visible.
The church ruins show how much Christianity had come to fill their lives with several build around the outskirts of the forum.

## Do
Walk around the remains of Sbeitla, the Roman town.  Quite extensive ruins which did appear rather heavily restored in places.  Watch out for local pickpockets who casually approach you as you walk around.

## Drink
Do bring water with you as it is hot at any time of year. There is also a good café adjoining the Museum with excellent coffee and Mint Tea.



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
HAÏDRA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:56:27


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 396
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ha%C3%AFdra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Haïdra (Arabic: حيدرة) is a municipality in western Tunisia, containing the ruins of Ammaedara, one of the oldest Roman cities in Africa. It was a diocese and is now a Roman Catholic titular see.

History
Ammaedara was on the border between the valleys and the Berber tribes and was part of the Roman province of Byzacena.
The Third Augustan Legion (Legio III Augusta) was installed in Ammaedara in 30 BC where they built their first fortress. From here the legion was partly responsible for the urbanisation of the North African provinces, building roads and other infrastructure. Its ruins include mausoleums, Byzantine fortresses, underground baths and a church.

Ecclesiastical history
Excavation of what has been called the Church of Melleus in the centre of Ammaedara has brought to light the tombs of some bishops of the see. In addition, documentary records survive of Eugenius, a bishop of Ammaedara, who participated in the Council of Carthage (255), which discussed the question of the lapsi, and of Speratus and Crescentianus, representing respectively the Catholics and the Donatists of the city, who took part in the Council of Carthage (411) of 411. Later Catholic bishops were Hyacinthus and Melleus, both of the second half of the 6th century.
Given the Roman province, it must have been a suffragan of the Metropolitan archbishop of its capital Hadrumetum (modern Sousse, also in Tunisia).

Titular see
No longer a residential bishopric, Ammaedara is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see. The diocese was nominally restored as Ammædæra of Ammædera and renamed Ammædara in 1925.
It has had the following incumbents, all of the lowest (episcopal) rank :

Mathieu Sislian (3 December 1909 – 30 August 1915)
Joseph Raphael John Crimont, Jesuits (S.J.) (15 February 1917 – 20 May 1945)
Joseph Gerald Holland, Society of African Missions (S.M.A.) (11 July 1946 – 18 April 1950)
Jacob Abraham Theophilos Kalapurakal (25 July 1950 – 27 June 1956)
Joseph-Rolland-Gustave Prévost-Godard (趙玉明), Société des Missions-Étrangères du Québec (Society of Foreign Missions; P.M.E.) (11 November 1956 – 13 November 2005)
Pierre Nguyễn Văn Đệ, Salesians (S.D.B.) (29 November 2005 – 25 July 2009)
Vincent Nguyen (Nguyễn Mạnh Hiếu) (6 November 2009 – present), Auxiliary Bishop of Toronto (Canada)

Notable people
Ahmed Jdey (10 June 1951 – 20 July 2012), author, historian and professor.

Population
References
Source and External links
GigaCatholic with titular incumbents biography links


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 741
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ha%C3%AFdra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Haïdra (arabe : حيدرة) ou Henchir Haïdra est une petite ville de l'ouest de la Tunisie, située dans la dorsale tunisienne, à quelques kilomètres de la frontière avec l'Algérie. Elle est le chef-lieu d'une municipalité comptant 3 451 habitants en 2014 et rattachée au gouvernorat de Kasserine.
Elle est connue pour son site archéologique.

Géographie
Situation
Haïdra est le centre de la délégation du même nom, créée le 30 janvier 1982, et s'étend sur 4 273 hectares. Elle est située à 83,9 kilomètres au nord-ouest de Kasserine et à 249 kilomètres au sud-ouest de Tunis, sur le parcours de la route nationale 4.
La ville est desservie par le chemin de fer depuis les travaux réalisés par la Compagnie des chemins de fer Bône-Guelma entre 1912 et 1941, et qui ont permis de la relier à Kasserine, Tébessa et Kalâat Khasba.

Climat
Le climat de Haïdra est semi-aride, comme dans une grande partie du Centre-Ouest de la Tunisie.

Histoire
Ammaedara ou Ad Medera, fondée au Ier siècle av. J.-C., est l'une des plus anciennes cités romaines d'Afrique ; elle est le siège de la Legio III Augusta à partir du règne d'Auguste, jusqu'à son déplacement pour raisons stratégiques vers Théveste (actuelle Tébessa en Algérie), à quarante kilomètres au sud-ouest, sous le règne de Vespasien. Des vétérans sont alors installés à Ammaedera qui reçoit le statut de colonie (Colonia Flauia Augusta Emerita Ammaedara) en 75. La création d'une colonie dans cette partie de l'Afrique proconsulaire permet de contrôler les routes passant sur les terrains de parcours des Musulames.
Devenant un nœud routier, traversé notamment par l'axe pénétrant reliant Carthage à Théveste, la cité se développe rapidement et se dote d'un grand nombre de monuments dont un arc de triomphe dédié à Septime Sévère. Alors que le christianisme se développe, elle devient un évêché en 258. En 411, la cité est le théâtre d'affrontements entre catholiques et donatistes, la population se scindant en deux derrière deux évêques différents.
Haïdra et ses ruines étaient sous le contrôle des Ouled Ali (Fraichiches) et faisaient partie de leur caïdat, plus particulièrement du territoire des Hwâfaz (Haouafedh), une branche des Ouled Ali. Victor Guérin confirme cette appartenance en décrivant son séjour parmi les Ouled Ali et leur caïd, Hadj Gaïd. Ce dernier lui remet un teskéré (laisser-passer) pour circuler à Haïdra et Thala, qui relèvent de son autorité.
Charles Monchicourt parle spécifiquement des Haouafedh, une sous-division des Ouled Ali, qui, selon lui, auraient pris possession de la région aux Ouled Boughanem. Il évoque également le fait que les Fraichiches, ainsi que les Ouled Rhida (nom rappelant une autre fraction des Ouled Ali), auraient chassé les Ouled Boughanem de Haïdra et Foussana.[réf. obsolète]
Haïdra sert de refuge aux insurgés de 1864 (Fraichiches et Madjer sous le commandement rebelle du « bey du peuple », Ali Ben Ghedhahem et d'autres tribus), qui ébranlent le pouvoir beylical. C'est notamment auprès des Hawafedh que Ben Ghedhahem se réfugie à de nombreuses reprises.
Un caïd fraichiche, du nom d'Ali Sghir ben Bârak, avait une maison à Haïdra qui a été photographiée.
La ville aurait également accueilli un chantier militaire visant à rénover ses anciennes fortifications byzantines de l'époque de Justinien qui vise à l'époque à protéger la région des Maures (Berbères) comme les Frexes d'Antalas, les ancêtres des Fraichiches et Musulames de Tacfarinas. Ahmad Sayyadi, en se basant sur les archives nationales de Tunisie, rapporte que les caïds et cheikhs des Fraichiches ont entretenu une correspondance régulière avec les autorités beylicales à propos de divers sujets. Il mentionne également les conflits impliquant les habitants de Haïdra et la collecte des impôts, en particulier entre 1863 et 1867. 

 Lors de cette bataille, les Fraichiches sont représentés par un étendard rouge (eux-mêmes se désignant comme le arch rouge).

Site archéologique
Haïdra est connue pour son site archéologique, celui de la cité d'Ammaedara.
Une mosaïque âgée de plus de 1 700 ans et découverte à Haïdra durant l'hiver 1939-1940 est offerte à l'Organisation des Nations unies par le président Habib Bourguiba en 1961. Elle est encore exposée à l'entrée nord du salon des délégués au siège de l'organisation.

Personnalités
Mohamed Ali Ganzoui (né en 1944), homme politique qui a effectué sa carrière au sein des services de sécurité ;
Ahmed Jdey (1951-2012), historien, anthropologue et universitaire ;
Lotfi Mraïhi (né en 1959), médecin et homme politique.

Références
Liens externes

Ressource relative à la géographie : Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire  

 Portail de la Tunisie


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 135
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Haïdra
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Understand
Haidra is the site of the ancient Roman city of Ammaedara of the Roman province of Byzacena. It originated around 30 BCE when the Third Augustan Legion was placed here to settle North African provinces, and develop them with roads and other infrastructure. In its time, Ammaedara was a diocese. Berbers eventually overwhelmed the frontier settlement in the spread of Islamic power across the northern African continent.

## See
At the archaeological site you can observe a wide array of ruins include mausoleums, Byzantine fortresses, underground baths and a church spread about the area. Also, it is possible to visit a museum at the location.
35.565418.453761 Ammaedara Museum. 08:00-16:00 M-Sa, closed Su. Exhibits on this Roman outpost. The ruins are scattered all about the museum, particularly in 3 different zones.    (updated Sep 2020)



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
MAKTHAR
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: archaeological_site
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:56:36


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,178
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maktar
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Maktar or Makthar (Arabic: مكثر), also known by other names during antiquity, is a town and archaeological site in Siliana Governorate, Tunisia.
Maktar was founded by the Berber Numidians as a defense post against Carthaginian expansion. At the end of the Third Punic War, it was settled by many Punic refugees after the Romans' destruction of Carthage in 146 BC. Under Roman rule, it obtained the status of a free city under Julius Caesar in 46 BC and became a Roman colony in AD 146. It formed part of the province of Byzacena and was the seat of a Christian bishop. Under the Romans and Byzantines, it reversed its earlier role to serve as a defense post against local Berber attacks. The town survived the Muslim invasions but was destroyed by the Banu Hilal tribe in the 11th century before being reëstablished. The present town had a population of 13,576 in 2014.

Name
The Carthaginians recorded the town's name variously as mktrm (Punic: 𐤌𐤊𐤕𐤓‬𐤌), mktrʿm (Punic: 𐤌𐤊𐤕𐤓𐤏‬𐤌), and mktʿrym (Punic: 𐤌𐤊𐤕𐤏𐤓‬𐤉𐤌). The Romans latinized the name as Mactaris, which became Colonia Aelia Aurelia Mactaris upon its elevation to colony status. This name was later arabized as Maktar.

Geography
It is located around 140 km (87 mi) southwest of Tunis and 60 km (37 mi) southeast of El Kef. The modern town lies on a plateau at around 900 m (2,953 ft) above sea level. It sits on the other side of a ravine from the Roman ruins and is known for its scenic views. The town has a continental climate, with cold winters and warm summers and occasional snowfall during the months of January and February.

History
In the 3rd century BC the Numidians built a strategic fortress at the site, chosen to control trade routes between Sbeitla, Kairouan, and El Kef. The establishment grew rapidly, and under Masinissa developed into a major center of Numidia. After the fall of Carthage in 146 BC, many Punic refugees flocked to Maktar, bringing their culture and skills. Buildings, civic organization, and language were strongly influenced by the Carthaginians.
Roman occupation at first retained the Punic government and administration through the consular-style magistracy of the sufetes, while Roman immigrants largely remained in a separate community (pagus). Mactaris grew into one of the richest cities in the province as a transit point for grain, oil, livestock, and textiles between Carthage, Sufetula, Thugga, and Tebessa. Under Trajan (97–117), the city was romanized.  The city received a uniform Roman constitution and colony status, whereby all residents were automatically given Roman citizenship.
The troubles of the third century, which ushered in the decline of the Roman Empire, also affected Maktar. The decline was halted awhile under Diocletian (284–305). In late antiquity the Mactaris diocese of the Roman Church was founded, and Christianization of the city could be seen in the construction of numerous churches. The city was mentioned in the 5th-century Notitia provinciarum et civitatum Africae and the Peutinger Map. Maktar survived the invasion of the Vandals and became an important Byzantine fortress.
Maktar survived the Muslim invasions, but the devastating raid of the Beni Hilal in 1050 led to the complete destruction and abandonment of the site.

Archaeology
Numerous inscriptions are recorded through the ruins. French archaeological excavations began in 1914, and were continued from 1944 on a large scale. Although not fully excavated, the ruins unearthed so far, especially of the thermal baths and the Schola of the Juvenes, mark this as one of the most remarkable ancient sites in Tunisia.

Pre-Roman structures
The site has several megaliths, large slabs evidently used in the burial of ashen remains.  Excavations by Mansour Ghaki of an intact burial chamber uncovered many ceramics of various origins, both local and imported, dating from the early third century BC.
The site includes an example of Punic mausoleum pyramid, similar to the mausoleum of Atban at Dougga (Thugga).  In addition, archaeologists have unearthed a Numidian-period public square that is thought to be the religious center of the city due to the presence of temples, which later housed a temple to Augustus and Rome.
The temple of Hathor Miskar is well known because of the extensive excavations that were carried out there, even if the remains are poorly preserved.  At the center of the sanctuary, archaeologists have found an altar dated to about 100 BC.
The Tunisian government included the site in its proposal of 2012 to add various pre-Islamic monuments to the Unesco World Heritage List.

Trajan Forum
This rectangular paved gathering place was designed ca 116 AD under Trajan as a forum for the Roman population when Roman citizenship was granted to members of the local elite. (The indigenous population had its own forum 50m to the southwest.) The space was surrounded by a portico, and the south side is still dominated by the majestic and well-preserved Arch of Trajan.

Large baths
The Great Baths are among the best preserved of their kind in North Africa. The walls of the frigidarium rise to 15 m. The building was constructed around the year 200 AD and is decorated with oriental foliage on the capitals and with a beautiful mosaic floor.

Scholia Juvenum
Built around the year 200, this building complex was the meeting place of the "youth organization" or Brotherhood, a kind of militia of young men, whose duties included policing and especially tax collection. The organization in Maktar consisted of about 70 members, and as in other Roman provincial cities it temporarily played an important role. Membership in the strictly managed organization was a prerequisite for higher  military service. The curriculum of the school included paramilitary exercises and sports, but also subjects such as finance, politics, and culture. The Brotherhood became increasingly influential over time, as rich citizens of provincial cities used it to resist the authority of the central government. In the year 238 the Emperor Gordian I himself joined the organization. Emperor Diocletian restored the school. In the Christian era the original building, called the Basilica, was used as a church, using a Punic sarcophagus from the adjacent necropolis as an altar.

Bishopric
Although the Roman diocese effectively ceased operating with the arrival of the Islamic armies, the see remains a titular see of the Roman Catholic Church, and there have been 20 titular bishops since 1514. The current bishop is Pedro Dulay Arigo
Six bishops are known from antiquity, including:

Marcus of Mactaris fl 325.
Comparitor fl.411 (Donatist)
Adelfius fl.484 (Catholic)
Germanus
Rutilius
Victor 6th century

Culture
Each year, the city hosts a festival called the "Maktaris Festival," which boosts the economy of the region.

Population
References
Citations
Bibliography
Ghaki, Mansour (2015), "Toponymie et Onomastique Libyques: L'Apport de l'Écriture Punique/Néopunique" (PDF), La Lingua nella Vita e la Vita della Lingua: Itinerari e Percorsi degli Studi Berberi, Studi Africanistici: Quaderni di Studi Berberi e Libico-Berberi, Naples: Unior, pp. 65–71, ISBN 978-88-6719-125-3, ISSN 2283-5636, archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-04-28, retrieved 2018-11-02. (in French)

External links

Lexicorient Archived 2019-10-24 at the Wayback Machine
Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Mactaris" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 197
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Makthar
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Makthar (arabe : مكثر), aussi orthographiée Maktar ou Mactar, est une ville du Nord-Ouest de la Tunisie, située sur un plateau à la bordure nord de la dorsale tunisienne.

Géographie
Elle est localisée à la limite entre le nord-ouest et le centre-ouest de la Tunisie, à une centaine de kilomètres au sud-ouest de Tunis et à quelques dizaines de kilomètres au sud-est du Kef. Avec une altitude de 900 mètres, elle constitue le chef-lieu le plus élevé du pays.
Chef-lieu d'une délégation du gouvernorat de Siliana, la ville compte 13 542 habitants en 2014.

Histoire
Elle est surtout connue pour son important site archéologique dont il subsiste de nombreux vestiges exposés dans un parc archéologique et dans un petit musée sur le site.
La ville se situe sur le territoire de la tribu des Ouled Ayar.

Culture
Chaque année, la ville accueille un festival, nommé « Festival Maktaris », qui représente un dynamisme économique pour la région.

Personnalités liées
Lafif Lakhdar (1934-2013), intellectuel franco-tunisien, y est né.
Rym Kefi, scientifique tunisienne, auteure d'une thèse en 2005 sur les origines et la diversité de la population ancienne de Makthar.

Références
Liens externes

Site officiel

 Portail de la Tunisie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
MONASTIR
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:56:44


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 75
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monastir
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Monastir may refer to:

Places
Tunisia
Monastir, Tunisia, the capital of Monastir Governorate
Monastir Habib Bourguiba International Airport
Monastir Governorate, one of the twenty-four governorates of Tunisia

Other places
Manastir, Republic of North Macedonia, the former name of Bitola
Manastir vilayet, covering parts of modern Albania, Greece and North Macedonia
Monastir, Sardinia, a comune in the Province of Cagliari, Italy

Other uses
US Monastir, a football club from Monastir, Tunisia

See also
Manastir (disambiguation)
Monastery


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 769
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D9%86%D8%B3%D8%AA%D9%8A%D8%B1
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

المنستير مدينة تونسية ومركز ولاية المنستير، تعد واحدة من أهم مدن تونس. تبعد 21 كم عن سوسة و 80 كم عن القيروان. يقطنها نحو نصف مليون ساكن، وهي منتجع سياحي بامتياز، ومركز تعليمي بارز، ظلّت على مدى نصف قرن مدينة الوزراء والحكام في تونس، فمن بين 18 وزيرا في عهد بورقيبة منحت لمدينة الرئيس 15 حقيبة.
كانت المدينة مستعمرة فينيقية تعرف بروسبينا أسسها مهاجرون من صور في نهاية القرن السادس ق.م تحديدا في عام 509 ق.م حيث ورد ذكر المدينة في المعاهدة التي عقدت بين القرطاجيين والرومان في ذلك العام. وقد اتخذها يوليوس قيصر كقاعدة عسكرية له.

التوأمة
أبرمت مدينة المنستير عام 1969 اتفاقية توأمة مع مدينة مونستر الألمانية بتأثير التشابه في تاريخ المدينتين. إذ أسست المدينتين في ذات الوقت تقريبا من القرن الثامن. وفي كلا الحالتين كان بناء دير هو سبب إنشاء المدينة، الأمر الذي ما زال يظهر في اسمي المدينتين. فمونستر والمنستير هما تحريف للكلمة اللاتينية «monasterium» بمعنى دير. دخلت المدينتين إلى توأمة هدفها الرئيس هو التعاون من أجل التنمية ومن ضمنها التنمية الاقتصادية حيث تتركز التوأمة على مجالات الطب والاقتصاد والثقافة وخاصة الموسيقى.

التاريخ
تسمية المنستير خصيصا جاءت لكثرة المعابد التي انتشرت في ربوع المدينة من برها إلى بحرها. واكتشفت العديد من القبور الصخرية داخل مغاوير يرجع عهدها إلى العهد الفينيقي وشبكة أنفاق كبرى تربط العديد من المدن ذات طابع ديني واستعملها الرومان والمسلمون ثانيا وأعادوا استعمالها وكثرت هذه القبور والمغاوير خصوصا في كل من جزيرة المائدة وجزيرة الوسطانية وجزيرة الغدامسي، وسمى تلك الجزر سكان المنستير. في ذلك الوقت باتت المدينة غير آهله نسبيا إذ كانت ماوى لرهبان والكهنة.
يعود تأسيسها للقرن الرابع قبل الميلاد، حيث كانت تسمى في العهد الفينيقي بـ«روسبينا» وأطلق عليها اسم المنستير في العهد البيزنطي، ثم الروماني بعد سقوط قرطاج في 146 قبل الميلاد، بل قبل ذلك بمائة سنة، حيث خاض فيها يوليوس قيصر أول معاركه التي تكللت بالنجاح، وظلت تونس مستعمرة رومانية حتى قدوم الفاتحين المسلمين في العقد الخامس للهجرة الموافق للقرن السابع الميلادي، وقضوا على القائد الروماني جرجير، وطردوهم واتخذوا المنستير حصنا بحريا لحماية عاصمتهم القيروان.

التعليم
الجامعة
يحضر جامعة المنستير أكثر من 30 ألف طالب، وأكبر الكليات كلية العلوم تليها كلية العلوم الاقتصادية والتصرف ثم المعهد العالي للبيوتكنولوجيا، ويناهز عدد الأساتذة 2000. وتضم الجامعة 5 كليات و 9 معاهد عليا ومدرستين، أي مجموع 16 مؤسسة هي: كليات «الطب» و«العلوم» و«طب الأسنان» (الوحيدة بالجمهورية التونسية) و«الصيدلة» و«العلوم الاقتصادية والتصرف»، والمعهد التحضيري للدراسات الهندسية، والمعهد العالي للإعلامية، والمعهد العالي للإعلامية والرياضيات، والمعهد العالي للبيوتكنولوجيا والمعهد العالي للفنون والحرف، والمعهد العالي للدراسات التطبيقية والإنسانية، و المعهد العالي للغات المطبقة في الأعمال والسياحة، والمعهد العالي لمهن الموضة، والمعهد العالي للعولم التطبيقية والتكنولوجيا، والمدرسة الوطنية للمهندسين، المدرسة العليا لعلوم وتطبيقات الصحةالمدرسة العليا لعلوم وتطبيقات الصحة بالمنستير - بعضها بالمهدية ومساكن.
وتضم جامعة المنستير 86 وحدة بحث علمي من بينها 31 بكلية الطب و 18 بكلية العلوم و 17 بكلية الصيدلة. كما تضم 12 مختبر بحث منها 5 بكلية العلوم.

المرافق
تتمتع المنستير بميناء يتسع لأكثر من 400 حاوية ويتواجد به (مطار الحبيب بورقيبة الدولي) أحد أنشط مطارات الجمهورية التونسية.

السياحة
المنتجعات
وتزخر بالكثير من النزل ومعظمها منتجعات سياحية، عددها بالمئات، وتستخدم الخيول والجمال للتنقل بينها، وتمتاز بالهدوء والنظافة، ينزلها أفواج سياحية من أوروبا وغيرها.
من بينها:

منتجع «أوريونت بالاس» الساحلي، به 5 مطاعم فاخرة ومتنوعة، تطل شرفات غرفها على البحر والطبيعة والشوارع الهادئة، وببعض غرفها مسابح.

الكورنيش
الكورنيش مرصوف بالآجر، وبه ضريح المازري، وترى منه جزر وتلال وسط البحر تضم أماكن للترفيه ومطاعم ومقاهي، كما تنتشر بامتداد الكورنيش، الذي يمتاز بالنظافة، ويزخر بالتحف المعمارية.

الرباط
رباط المنستير تراه من الكورنيش، أسسه هرثمة بن الأعين سنة 80 هـ (796 م) في عهد الخليفة العباسي هارون الرشيد، ويعد أحد أعظم المعالم العسكرية الدفاعية. كان حراسه من المتطوعين لحراسة الثغور، ويعرفون في الأدبيات الإسلامية التاريخية بـ«المرابطين في سبيل الله». وأدخلت على الرباط تحصينات كبيرة بين القرنين الـ15 والـ18. وترى من أعلى هرم في الرباط - والبالغ ارتفاعه نحو 20 مترا - منظراً عاماً لمدينة المنستير. كما تترائى ملامح جزيرتي سيدي غدامسي (نسبة لمدينة غدامس الليبية) والموستانية، وكذلك كهوف المنستير التاريخية التي تعود لأكثر من 4000 سنة المنحوتة فيها مساكن.

الفنادق
من أشهر فنادق المنستير:

«مونستير تسنتر» تحتوي غرفه الـ186 على جميع الخدمات الإعلامية، وتحيط بمسباحه كراس للاستلقاء.
«فندق الصحراء» تطل غرفه التي تزيد على الألف على حدائق جميلة ويوفر أماكن لممارسة الهوايات المختلفة.
«فندق مازري» يطل على البحر قريباً من المرسى، وقريب من المطار، وبه 52 غرفة نوم و 3 أجنحة، تمتاز بلوحات ورسوم متنوعة، ويتيح للزائر استئجار كوخ بحري من القش.
«فندق طلاس فيليج سقانص» يقع على مساحة 15 هكتارا على الشاطئ، تحيط به حدائق، وغرفه الـ486 واسعة، وبه 5 مطاعم وملاعب ومركزا للعلاج.

الأعلام
ولد في المدينة في 3 أغسطس 1903 رئيس الجمهورية التونسية الأول الحبيب بورقيبة وقد توفي ودُفِن فيها في 6 أبريل 2000. ووُلد فيها أيضا الطبيب والمناضل سالم الشاذلي.


== المراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 2,188
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monastir
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Monastir (arabe : منستير  [mʊnæstir]), est une ville côtière du Sahel tunisien, au centre-est de la Tunisie, située sur une presqu'île au sud-est du golfe d'Hammamet, à une vingtaine de kilomètres à l'est de Sousse et à 162 kilomètres au sud de Tunis. En 2014, la population de la municipalité atteint 93 306 habitants.
La ville est le chef-lieu du gouvernorat du même nom depuis 1974.

Toponymie
Le nom de la ville proviendrait du mot « monastère » (monasterium en latin) même s'il reste un sujet de débat. Selon Hassan Hosni Abdelwaheb, le nom a une origine arabe, elle-même empruntée au terme grec monastrion, ayant la signification de monastère et répandu dans l'Empire byzantin pour décrire les forts bâtis sur le littoral méditerranéen. Avant la conquête musulmane et juste après le déclin de l'ancienne ville punico-romaine de Ruspina, Monastir est une ville bâtie par une communauté de moines chrétiens, reconnus par leur abbaye, qui occupent un monastère pleinement autonome. Après la conquête, les musulmans préservèrent le nom.

Géographie
Localisation
Monastir est une presqu'île entourée par la mer Méditerranée sur trois côtés et formant, vers le sud, le golfe du même nom, qui s'étend jusqu'au cap de Ras Dimass. Elle offre des paysages diversifiés, notamment ses plages sableuses et rocheuses ainsi qu'une falaise s'étendant sur près de six kilomètres.

Climat
Histoire
Durant la Préhistoire, plusieurs civilisations se sont succédé dans la région. Les fouilles archéologiques montrent l'existence de traces de la civilisation atérienne qui a couvert la fin du Paléolithique moyen et le début du Paléolithique supérieur. La civilisation des Hawanet succède à la civilisation atérienne vers 3000-2000 av. J.-C.
Monastir est bâtie sur les ruines de l'ancienne ville punico-romaine de Ruspina dont l'existence s'étend sur près de dix siècles, du IVe siècle av. J.-C. au VIe siècle apr. J.-C.. Ruspina qui signifie « presqu'île » représente un site stratégique à l'abri des incursions extérieures. Elle est connue pour avoir aidé le Carthaginois Hannibal Barca dans ses combats contre les Romains au IIIe siècle av. J.-C. Pendant la période romaine, Ruspina a un statut de ville libre ; c'est la première ville africaine à s'être alliée à Jules César, ce qui permet à ce dernier de s'y réfugier avec son armée en 46 av. J.-C. et de mener sa première bataille contre les Pompéiens, une alliance qui permet à la ville de prospérer et d'avoir un rang élevé.
L'histoire musulmane de Monastir est étroitement liée à l'édification des ribats, mosquées et autres mausolées, ce qui confère à la région un aspect spirituel et intellectuel dont la renommée dépasse les frontières de l'Occident musulman. La ville est la première ville arabo-musulmane construite en Ifriqiya et sert à la défense du royaume aghlabide et à sa capitale Kairouan, choisie suffisamment loin de la côte pour éviter les assauts de la flotte byzantine contrôlant alors la mer Méditerranée.

Lors du conflit hispano-ottoman, qui dure tout au long du XVIe siècle, Monastir est la cible d'attaques des deux belligérants. La population réussit à éviter une annexion par les Espagnols en 1534 et la ville s'organise sous la forme d'une république populaire. Elle tombe cependant en 1550, avant d'être prise par les Ottomans en 1554 pour être rattachée à la régence de Tunis dès 1574. Dès le début de la présence ottomane en Tunisie, Monastir possède un caïdat, qui existait déjà sous les Hafsides, et qui jouit de toutes les prérogatives d'un gouverneur de province : il est chargé de l'administration générale, du maintien de la justice et de la charge lucrative de fermier des impôts ; il est aussi l'agent d'exécution du bey de Tunis.
Laissée pour compte sous le protectorat français, Monastir retrouve son statut après l'indépendance, en devenant le chef-lieu du gouvernorat du même nom en 1974. Elle est la ville natale du premier président Habib Bourguiba, qui s'y fait construire de son vivant un mausolée dans lequel il est inhumé, ainsi qu'un palais présidentiel à proximité de la ville. La mosquée Bourguiba, datant de 1963, est aussi érigée en son honneur alors que l'aéroport international de Monastir porte également son nom.
Monastir devient une importante ville universitaire. Avec Sousse et Sfax, la ville devient grâce à son port un point de transbordement pour le marché de l'huile d'olive. Elle est également, depuis les années 1960, l'un des centres les plus importants du secteur touristique tunisien, en particulier avec sa station balnéaire de Skanès.
Lors des événements de la révolution tunisienne de 2011, la prison civile de Monastir est incendiée dans la nuit du 14 au 15 janvier. Plus de quarante prisonniers y trouvent la mort.

Architecture et urbanisme
Le ribat de Monastir est érigé par le wali Harthama Ibn Ayoun sur ordre du calife abbasside Hâroun ar-Rachîd en 796 comme moyen de défense contre les attaques de la flotte byzantine en Méditerranée. Il représente, avec le ribat de Sousse, l'une des deux forteresses les plus importantes de la côte du Sahel. D'après des messages relevant de l'histoire locale et datant du début du Xe siècle, c'est un mérite que de séjourner dans ce ribat connu sous le nom de Grande forteresse. Un service de garde de trois jours au ribat de Monastir est alors considéré comme une grande action religieuse, car les musulmans sont tenus de protéger leur patrie. Ce mérite était amplifié pendant les croisades.
La forteresse était perçue, aussi bien parmi les combattants que parmi les ascètes, comme un lieu de pèlerinage et de méditation pour les fêtes religieuses comme l'Achoura ou le ramadan. À l'étage supérieur de l'aile sud-est se trouvait une petite mosquée abritant un mihrab. Elle est aujourd'hui utilisée comme musée où sont exposés des objets provenant de la région ainsi que de Kairouan.
Parmi les monuments importants de la ville figure également la Grande Mosquée de Monastir, édifice en pierre de taille d'architecture sobre élevé au IXe siècle puis agrandi au cours des XIe et XVIIIe siècles.

La ville de Monastir abrite aussi un mausolée inauguré en 1963 par le président de l'époque, Habib Bourguiba. L'édifice, encadré par deux minarets de 25 mètres de hauteur, est surmonté d'un dôme doré qui est lui-même entouré de deux coupoles vertes. La porte d'entrée ainsi que la grille qui sépare celui-ci du reste du cimetière sont deux exemples de l'art tunisien.

Culture
Patrimoine culturel
Monastir possède un musée des arts islamiques, inauguré le 5 août 1958 et qui est logé au premier étage de l'aile sud du ribat ; il comporte près de 300 œuvres (fragments de bois, stèles funéraires, céramiques lustrées, etc.) et reçoit chaque année la visite de presque 100 000 visiteurs.
Le festival d'été de Monastir est organisé annuellement au sein du ribat et se poursuit pendant une période de trois à quatre semaines, offrant de nombreux spectacles musicaux, théâtraux et même cinématographiques.
À quelques kilomètres du centre-ville, le centre culturel de Monastir fondé en 2000 accueille des manifestations culturelles diverses. En son sein, plusieurs associations culturelles dédiées principalement à la peinture, la musique et le théâtre y exercent leurs activités. Ce centre vient remplacer l'ancien centre culturel situé au cœur même de la ville ; il conserve quelques activités essentiellement estudiantines.
L'Union des écrivains monastiriens est une association dont le local est situé dans la cité Chraka de l'ancienne ville. Elle accueille plusieurs membres et organise diverses rencontres culturelles.

Musique
L'ethnomusicologue et clarinettiste Hassine Haj Youssef figure parmi les personnalités les plus actives de Monastir dans le domaine musical. Disciple de Salah El Mahdi, il est aussi le père du violoniste et compositeur Jasser Haj Youssef. Il est professeur au Conservatoire national de Monastir et à l'Institut supérieur de musique de Sousse. Il a adapté la méthode de Zoltán Kodály à l'enseignement de la musique arabe, il est aussi producteur de plusieurs émissions de musique traditionnelle et d'anthropologie à Radio Monastir et à la télévision nationale.
Depuis 2005, il consacre son temps à la composition et aux recherches sur les musiques soufies de Tunisie.

Héraldique
Le drapeau qui surmonte le blason au centre des armoiries de la ville (moitié blanc, moitié rouge avec un croissant bleu) est hissé sur le ribat de Monastir vers 1500.

Enseignement
La ville de Monastir dénombre :

cinq collèges de deuxième cycle de l'enseignement de base : Ali-Bourguiba, Moufida-Bourguiba Imtiez, Salem-Bchir et Pilote, compétent pour les gouvernorats de Monastir et Mahdia ;
quatre lycées : Fatouma-Bourguiba (ancien lycée de garçons), Hédi-Khefacha, Bourguiba (ancien lycée de jeunes filles) et Pilote (ouvert depuis l'année scolaire 2003-2004).
Monastir est par ailleurs le siège de l'Université de Monastir fondée le 2 septembre 2004 et qui couvre les gouvernorats de Monastir et Mahdia. Sur les seize établissements qui en dépendent, dix sont localisés à Monastir : 

les facultés des sciences, de médecine, de médecine dentaire et de pharmacie ;
l'École nationale d'ingénieurs ;
l'École supérieure des sciences et techniques de la santé ;
les Instituts supérieurs de biotechnologie, d'informatique et de mathématiques et des métiers de la mode ;
l'Institut préparatoire aux études d'ingénieurs.

L'effectif des étudiants de Monastir dépasse 27 000 en 2007-2008, ce qui fait de la ville l'une des plus importantes en matière d'études universitaires avec Tunis, Sfax et Sousse.

Dialecte
Le dialecte monastirien présente les caractéristiques du dialecte parlé dans l'ensemble du Sahel tunisien.

Gastronomie
La ville est connue pour plusieurs plats phares, notamment le couscous au cherkaw, auquel un festival local est dédié chaque été depuis 2004 ; celui-ci est organisé par une association spécifique sous le patronage du gouverneur. Le poisson salé, un plat préparé à base de poisson (généralement du mulet) dont on enlève les écailles et les arêtes avant de le bander dans du sel. Après quelques jours, le poisson est débarrassé du bandage et placé dans l'eau pour le désaler puis cuit à la vapeur accompagné de tomates pelées, de charmoula, d'harissa, de raisins secs et d'oignon ; il est consommé très souvent à l'occasion de la fête de l'Aïd el-Fitr.
Pour l'occasion des fêtes de mariage, un couscous spécial appelé smasem est cuisiné : il s'agit d'un couscous à la viande de bœuf, le nom étant en relation avec les parts généreuses de viande servies à côté de la semoule.

Politique
La municipalité de Monastir comporte un conseil municipal composé de trente membres. Les élections municipales du 9 mai 2010 ont conduit à la formation d'un conseil dont les membres appartiennent tous au Rassemblement constitutionnel démocratique (RCD), le parti au pouvoir au niveau national. La municipalité est divisée en quatre arrondissements : Médina Est, Médina Ouest, Skanès et Helya.
Par ailleurs, de l'indépendance à 2011, tous les maires de Monastir appartiennent au parti au pouvoir sous des appellations diverses :

1957-1963 : Habib Bourguiba
1963-1980 : Habib Bourguiba Jr.
1980-1985 : Hassen Bergaoui
1985-1986 : Mohamed Ameur Ghedira
1986-1990 : Néji Skhiri
1990-1995 : Mohamed Mohsen Guetari
1995-2005 : Mohamed Gorsane
2005-2010 : Mohamed Besbès
2010-2011 : Mondher Marzouk
2011-2016 : Ali Mzali (par intérim, délégation spéciale)
depuis 2016 : Nabil Hmida (délégation spéciale)
Au niveau national, un seul député issu de la liste du RCD, majoritaire aux élections du 25 octobre 2009, représente la ville de Monastir. Il s'agit de Mohamed Gorsane, ancien maire.

Santé
La ville de Monastir est desservie par l'hôpital Fattouma-Bourguiba ainsi que le Centre International Carthage Médical, une polyclinique située dans la zone touristique de la ville.

Transport
Transport en commun
La ville de Monastir est desservie par le Métro du Sahel avec cinq stations sur son territoire : Les Hôtels, Aéroport Skanès-Monastir, La Faculté, Monastir (Gare Habib-Bourguiba) et Zone industrielle.

Transport aérien
Monastir est desservie par l'aéroport international de Monastir Habib-Bourguiba.

Économie
La ville de Monastir accueille le siège de la compagnie aérienne Nouvelair Tunisie situé dans la zone touristique de Dkhila.

Sport
Monastir dispose d'un stade de football, le stade Mustapha-Ben-Jannet, où évolue l'Union sportive monastirienne. La salle omnisports Mohamed-Mzali de Monastir, troisième salle couverte du pays avec une capacité d'accueil de 4 075 places, y est inaugurée le 8 avril 2006.
Outre l'ancienne salle omnisports existent des terrains découverts de basket-ball et de handball ainsi que trois terrains annexes de football. Une piscine couverte accueille le club de natation alors que le Tennis Club de Monastir occupe les terrains de tennis du stade municipal[Quoi ?] où se déroule à plusieurs reprises un tournoi international junior[Quoi ?] ; un autre club de tennis occupe les terrains du complexe touristique El Habib. Le complexe sportif accueille aussi d'autres activités comme le sport féminin, le football en salle et les arts martiaux.

Jumelages
La ville de Monastir est jumelée avec la ville de Münster (Allemagne) depuis le 11 mars 1969.

Personnalités liées
Notes et références
Bibliographie
Mohamed Bergaoui, Monastir, fragments d'histoire : avec plus de 100 illustration du vieux Monastir, Tunis, À compte d'auteur, 1997, 132 p. (ISBN 978-9973177865).
Mohamed Salah Sayadi, Monastir : essai d'histoire sociale du XIXe siècle, Tunis, Imprimerie La Presse, 1979, 528 p. (OCLC 799698960).
Slimane Mostafa Zbiss, Inscriptions de Monastir, Tunis, Imprimerie La Presse, 1960 (OCLC 256405618).
Slimane Mostafa Zbiss, Monastir : ses monuments, Tunis, Secrétariat d'État aux Affaires culturelles, 1964, 55 p. (OCLC 434006191).

Liens internes
Église de Monastir

Liens externes

Site officiel

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail de la mer Méditerranée


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 1,330
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Monastir
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Monastir is a city in Tunisia 160 km from Tunis. Set along a superb coastline with a blue sea and long golden sandy beaches, Monastir is a pleasant seaside resort, a historical town full of tradition and one of the best tourist destinations in Northern Africa.
Under the protection of its ribat, one of the most impressive fortresses of Tunisia, Monastir's medina, fishing port, marina and background of villages and orchards make it a lively and welcoming destination.

## Understand
Situated halfway between Sousse and Mahdia, and in the intersection of Kairouan and El Jem, Monastir is distinguished by its location in the central coast of Tunisia. It is an ancient city dating from Phoenician times. Due to its strategic location, it shelters the oldest and the most important ribat in the Maghreb: a lovely fortress that is one of Tunisia's finest examples of Islamic military architecture.
Monastir is also known as a really beautiful and calm city.

## By plane
Monastir is a three-hour flight from many principal European cities.
35.7583310.7547221 Monastir Habib Bourguiba International Airport (MIR  IATA), Skanes (9 km from the city center), ☏ +216 73 521 300.
Getting to the airport: the trip by taxi costs about 5 DT. Getting to the airport is also possible through train between Monastir and Sousse, since "Skanes-Monastir airport station" is 200 m from airport terminal.

## By train
There are regular train services to Tunis and Sousse to the north and Mahdia to the south.
35.770810.82642 Monastir railway station (Gare Habib Bourguiba Monastir).      (updated Jul 2022)

## By bus
A louage to Sousse takes about 20 minutes and costs 2.1 DT. It departs just outside of the medina walls next to the train station.
35.773210.8256853 Gare Routière de Monastir.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Get around
The distances between the Medina, Ribat and Marina are small enough to be covered on foot. Taxis for longer distances within the city can be found everywhere and are very cheap (less than DT3 for a trip within the city).

## See
35.776210.83291 Ribat. This fortified monastery is located next to the sea and provides a great visit with most of the ruins open to clamber over. It may be familiar as it has been used in several films as a stand in for Jerusalem, most notably Monty Python's Life of Brian. You can climb the tower and have a nice view over the coastline and city. 8 DT.      (updated Feb 2018)
Ribat also houses 35.7760110.8330682 Islamic Arts Museum of Monastir. Contains illuminated manuscripts, Coptic textiles from the fourth to seventh century, textiles from the ninth century, the Fatimid glass of tenth and eleventh centuries, Abbasid pottery, coins of gold and silver from the tenth and eleventh centuries and especially unique: an Arabic astrolabe made in Cordoba in 927 CE. Price included in Ribat entrance fee.  (updated Nov 2018)
35.777710.82853 Mausoleum of Habib Bourguiba, Skanes, ☏ +216 71 341 077. Enormous mausoleum, in the centre of a large cemetery. It holds the remains of former president Habib Bourguiba, the father of Tunisian independence, who died on April 6, 2000. Free.      (updated Feb 2018)
35.77818710.7827534 Museum of Habib Bourguiba, Palais Presidentiel de Skanes. It's a house of Habib Bourguiba, Tunisia's first president, which was later turned into a museum. It's worth a visit only if you're interested in the modern history of Tunisia, otherwise nothing spectacular.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.77417510.8309685 Museum of folk arts and traditions of Monastir (Musée des arts et traditions populaires). Displays traditional Tunisian costumes: wedding costumes, adornments, woven domestic items and copper objects.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.7706310.841646 The Old Port el Kahlia. Old port with excellent location and panoramic views.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.779810.83347 Marina. Admiring looks, enormous yachts, floating restaurants and luxury hotels. It's also a nice place for a stroll in the sun and for a coffee. Free.    (updated Feb 2018)
35.669910.89268 Great Mosque of Monastir. Built in the 9th century and then enlarged over the centuries. It now includes a prayer room and a minaret, and doesn't have a courtyard inside. Off-limits to non-Muslims.      (updated Nov 2018)
35.77176310.8405839 Zaouia of Sidi Mansour Ba Yazid. Mausoleum of 17th-century Muslim mystic.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.787210.8338410 Ancient ruins, Ghdamsi island.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Further away
35.67736710.87759911 Lamta Archaeological Museum, Avenue Habib Bourguiba, Lamta. Tu-Su 9AM–1PM and 4–7PM. The ancient city of Leptiminus is located about 10 km south of Monastir. It was founded by Phoenician sailors around the 12th century BC. The modern city of Lamta was built on top of this ancient city, thus leaving almost nothing of it. Although some remnants from the times of Leptiminus can still be found in this museum.      (updated Nov 2018)
35.67621410.87986812 Ribat Lamta. 9AM–6PM.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.62553710.89863113 Museum of Moknine (Musee Archeologique de Moknine), Moknine. Tu-Su 9:30AM–4:30PM.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Do
35.77442910.834291 Bicycle rental. 5 DT/hour.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.75998610.7286432 Karting, Airport Road, Tourist Area (near Sahara Beach Hotel), ☏ +216 23400004, karting-monastir@hotmail.com. 10:00 - 02:00 in summer and 09:30 - 19:30 in the rest of the year. The Palm Karting Monastir offers a great deal for those who are passionate for karting or those who want to try it. Two circuits (adults and kids), a coffee shop, a great Mexican restaurant and a nice party space. 15 minutes/20 DT and 30 minutes/30 DT.    (updated Nov 2018)
Carriage. You can also go around Monastir with the famous and traditional carriages and of course for a good price.
Touristic train. It is a cheap and original means to discover the city.
35.7457810.799843 Flamingo Golf Course, Route de Ouardanine B.P. 40, ☏ +216 73 500 283.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.7778210.690214 Palm Links Golf Course, ☏ +216 73 521 910. Designed by Californian architect.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Buy
35.77343910.8293751 Medina. Only a small section of the original Medina remains but it contains a bazaar selling the usual souvenirs, artisanal jewelry, pottery and carpets. Prices seemed to be generally lower than in nearby Sousse.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.77239710.8307792 Monoprix. 8:30AM–10PM. A large supermarket near the southeast wall of the Medina. You can buy everything here, including alcohol (wine/beer) at the back entrance. Next to Monoprix is a small local market for meat, vegetables, bread, etc.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Budget
35.76842210.8299721 Mix Max Tandoori, rue moufida bourguiba, R6.    (updated Sep 2022)
35.76610610.8299962 Mamma Chami.    (updated Sep 2022)

## Mid-range
35.77982510.8313593 restaurant Marina The Captain, cap marina.    (updated Sep 2022)
35.76807510.8301034 Guilty.    (updated Sep 2022)
35.77468210.8293645 El koojina, Bab El Kram n°6.    (updated Aug 2022)
35.76568610.826866 Soprano.    (updated Sep 2022)
35.77021310.8294757 BIZZ'ART.    (updated Sep 2022)
35.77909910.832238 Restaurant Bel Air Central.    (updated Sep 2022)

## Splurge
10.82194610.7592176 Royal Thalassa Monastir, Skanes, ☏ +216 73 520520, fax: +216 73520500. The only hotel with 5 stars in town. From 250 DT double.    (updated Mar 2017)

## Sleep
The infrastructure of hotels is of a remarkable quality and continues to get even better. Classed hotels (from one to five stars) are beyond reproach for hygiene and facilities. Covered swimming pools, sporting facilities, mini-clubs for children and spa centers are very common.
35.76443710.7345611 Amir Palace, Dkhila, ☏ +216 73 520 900, fax: +216 73 521 823. 4-star hotel. From 100 DT double.    (updated Mar 2017)
35.76254410.7500232 Dessole Bella Vista, Zone Touristique Dkhila Skanes, ☏ +216 73 520 555, fax: +216 73 521 477. 4-star hotel.
35.7727410.8370773 Delphin Ribat Hotel Monastir (El Habib), Av Habib Bourguiba, ☏ +216 73 466750, fax: +216 73 466751. 3-star hotel. From 100 DT double.
35.7812810.8333464 Marina Cap Monastir - Appart Hôtel, Port Marina Monastir, ☏ +216 73 462 305. Nice studio apartments in the Marina with sea view, private bathroom and small kitchen. You can get a bargain price when booking online through one of the common hotel portals. From 80 DT.    (updated Nov 2018)
35.78300610.692655 El Mouradi Skanes Hotel. A great hotel close to the beach. It is not a cheap hotel but it is worth the price. From 100 TN.    (updated Nov 2018)

## Go next
Sousse
Kairouan
El Jem



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
MAHDIA
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: city
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:56:54


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 983
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahdia
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mahdia (Arabic: المهدية ) is a Tunisian coastal city with 76,513 inhabitants, south of Monastir and southeast of Sousse.
Mahdia is a provincial centre north of Sfax. It is important for the associated fish-processing industry, as well as weaving. It is the capital of Mahdia Governorate.

History
Antiquity
The old part of Mahdia corresponds to the Roman city called Aphrodisium and, later, called Africa (a name perhaps derived from the older name), or Cape Africa. The Catholic Church's list of titular sees includes a no longer residential bishopric called Africa and, since there is no record of an episcopal see in Roman times called by either of these names (nor by that of Alipota, another Roman town that Charles Tissot suggested tentatively might be represented by present-day Mehdia), it is supposed that the episcopal see of Africa was established when the city was held by the Kingdom of Sicily, as a part of the Kingdom of Africa (1147–1160) and when Pope Eugene III consecrated a bishop for it in 1148. An inventory of movable property of the church of Africa (inventarium thesauri Africani) exists in an archive of the Cappella Palatina of Palermo in Sicily. Salim Dev identified Mahdia instead with ancient Ruspae or Ruspe, which is more commonly taken to have been at Henchir Sbia (or just Sbia), north of Mahdia, or at the ruins known as Ksour Siad. The most illustrious bishop of this see was Fulgentius of Ruspe. The Catholic Church's list of titular sees, which identifies the see of Africa as Mahdia, identifies Ruspe/Ruspae as Henchir Sbia.
The Mahdia shipwreck – a sunken ship found off Mahdia's shore, containing Greek art treasures – is dated to about 80 BC, the early part of Roman rule in this region.

Islamic era
Muslim Mahdia was founded by the Fatimids under the Caliph Abdallah al-Mahdi and made the capital of Ifriqiya. As the then-newly-created Fatimid Caliphate was a Shi'a regime supported by a Berber Kutama military, the caliph may have been motivated to move his capital here so as to put some distance between his power base and the predominantly Sunni city of Kairouan (the traditional capital of Ifriqiya up to that point). Construction began in 916 and the new city was officially inaugurated on 20 February 921, although some construction continued afterward. In addition to its heavy fortified walls, the city included the Fatimid palaces, an artificial harbor, and a congregational mosque (the Great Mosque of Mahdia). Most of the Fatimid city has not survived to the present day. The mosque, however, is one of the most well-preserved Fatimid monuments in the Maghreb, although it has been extensively damaged over time and was in large part reconstructed by archeologists in the 1960s. Fragments of mosaic pavements from the palaces have also been discovered from modern excavations. 
The Zirid dynasty, which succeeded the Fatimids in the Maghreb, moved their capital here in 1057. In 1087, the town was attacked by raiding ships from Genoa and Pisa who burned the Muslim fleet in the harbor. The attack played a critical role in Christians' seizure of control of the Western Mediterranean, which allowed the First Crusade to be supplied by sea. Their rule was brought to an end by the Norman conquest of the city in 1148. In 1160 the city came under Almohad rule.

al-Bakri, in the 11th century, wrote about the city:"The city of Mahdia is named after Ubayd Allah al-Mahdi, who built it, as mentioned in historical records. It is sixty miles from Kairouan. The sea surrounds it on three sides, and it can only be entered from the western side. It has a large suburb known as Zwaila, where markets, public baths, and the homes of its inhabitants are located. Al-Mu‘izz ibn Badis built a wall around this suburb. The city itself is about two miles long, with its width varying—it is never as wide as its full length. All its buildings are made of stone. The city has iron gates with no wood in them, each gate weighing a thousand quintals. Each gate is thirty spans long, with each nail in them weighing six pounds. The gates are decorated with depictions of animals. [..] Mahdia serves as a harbor for ships from Alexandria, the Levant, Sicily, al-Andalus, and other places. Its port is carved into solid rock and can accommodate thirty ships."
The role of the capital was taken over by Tunis in the 12th century during the Almohad era, which it remained during the Hafsid Dynasty. Later the city was subject to many raids. In 1390 it was the target of the Barbary Crusade, when a French army laid siege to the city but failed to take it.
The city was captured by the Spaniards in 1550. A Spanish garrison remained there until 1553. Charles V then offered the charge of the town to the Order of Saint John who ruled Malta but they refused it deeming it too expensive. The emperor ordered the Viceroy of Sicily, Juan de Vega, to dismantle Mahdia despite it being a strategically important stronghold. The demolition tasks were carried out by Hernando de Acuña. Shortly after Mahdia was reoccupied by the Ottomans, but only to live by fishing and oil-works, and the town lost its logistic and commercial importance. It remained under Turkish rule until the 19th century.
During the Nazi Occupation of Tunisia in World War II, Mahdia was the site where Khaled Abdelwahhab hid approximately two dozen persecuted Jews.

Transport
Gare Mahdia forms the southern terminus of the metre-gauge Sahel Metro railway line, which runs from Sousse and Monastir.

Climate
Gallery of images
See also
European enclaves in North Africa before 1830
Mahdia shipwreck
List of cities in Tunisia

References
Notes
External links

tourismtunisia.com Archived 2010-11-23 at the Wayback Machine (in English)
LookLex / Tunisia Archived 2010-11-25 at the Wayback Machine
Mahdia Portal
"Mahdia" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-AR (ar) | Words: 2,433
URL: https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A7%D9%84%D9%85%D9%87%D8%AF%D9%8A%D8%A9_(%D8%AA%D9%88%D9%86%D8%B3)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

المهدية، مدينة ساحلية تونسية ومقر لولاية المهدية. عدد السكان 410.812.
المهدية (مهدية) هي مدينة ساحلية تقع 205 كلم جنوب تونس العاصمة. وهي أيضا عاصمة ولاية المهدية.

تاريخ المدينة
تعتبر مدينة المهدية ثاني عواصم الخلافة بإفريقية ولئن عرفت فترات تاريخية متعاقبة منذ القدم فإن الغموض يكتنف تاريخ هذه المدينة قبل العهد الفاطمي رغم تنوع الآثار الموجودة بالجهة من ناحية البرّ والبحر والتي تشير إلى وجود تجمع سكني بالمنطقة منذ الفترة البونية.
وقد امتدت الحقبة التاريخية التي ميزت المدينة منذ تأسيس الفاطميين لها وجعلها عاصمة للخلافة الفاطمية سنة 308هـ./920م، حيث اتخذها الخليفة الأول عبيد الله الفاطمي عاصمة وذلك لموقعها الجغرافي المميز فهي تطل على البحر من ثلاث جهات جعلت من المدينة حصنا منيعا قادرا على التصدي للغزوات الخارجية وجعلتها مركزا تجاريا هاما بحوض البحر الأبيض المتوسط.
يقول المؤرخ حسن حسني عبد الوهاب عن المهدية في كتابه خلاصة تاريخ تونس”المهدية مدينة جليل قدرها، شهير في قواعد الإسلام ذكرها، وهي من بناء عبيد الله المهدي أول خلفاء العبيديين وإليه تنتسب، وكان ابتداء بنائه لها سنة 303هـ/ 915م وجعلها دار مملكته.
وأول ما ابتنى منها سورها الغربي الذي فيه أبوابها، ثم أمر بحفر مرسى المدينة، وكان حجرا صلدا، فنقره نقرا وجعله حصنا لمراكبه الحربية، وأقام على فم هذا المرسى سلسلة من حديد رفع أحد طرفيها عند دخول السفن ثم تعاد كما كانت، تحصينا للمرسى من دخول مراكب الروم وابتنى ” دار الصناعة” وهي من عجائب الدنيا، ثم شرع في حفر الأهراء بداخل المدينة، وبنى الجباب والمصانع، واختزن الأهراء بالطعام، وملا الجباب (جمع جب) بالماء.
وكان اتساع المهدية في أول بناءها من الجوف إلى القبلة قدر غلوة سهم، فاستصغرها المهدي عند ذلك، فردم من البحر مقدارها وادخله في المدينة فاتسعت، والجامع الأعظم الآن والدار المعروفة في القديم بدار المحاسبات من ما من البحر. وابتنى لسائر الناس مدينة أخرى تسمى زويلة وهي إحدى المهديتين وبينهما قدر غلوة سهم، وجعل الأسواق والفنادق فيها، وادار بها خندق متسعة تجتمع بها الأمطار، فكانت كالربض لمدينة المهدية. وكان بخارجها الحمى المعروفة بحمى زويلة، وكان كله جنات وبساتين بسائر الثمار وأنواع الفاكهة"
بعد خروج المعز لدين الله الخليفة الفاطمي إلى مصر سنة 360هـ./970م، وتأسيس مدينة القاهرة حكم الصنهاجيين إفريقية ولكنهم تألبوا فيما بعد على الفاطميين فانتقم هؤلاء منهم وأرسلوا إليهم القبائل الهلالية التي ساهمت في نشر قدر كبير من الفوضى، ومنذ ذلك التاريخ توالت الحملات ضد المدينة من الأساطيل الأوروبية وخاصة الإسبانية حيث تراوحت حال المدينة بين السقوط والاسترداد وقد انتهى كل ذلك بتدميرها وحرقها من طرف الإسبان في 1555م. وقد فقدت بذلك أهميتها كعاصمة إلى أن قامت العناصر التركية بإعادة اعمارها من جديد حيث أعطتها طابعا جديدا تحولت بموجبه إلى مدينة نشطة يتعايش فيها المسلمون والمسيحيون واليهود ويرتكز اقتصادها على قطاعات متعدّدة.
وفي فترة الإحتلال الفرنسي للبلاد التونسية ساهمت المهدية في الحركة الوطنية التونسية والكفاح وأنجبت ثلة من المناضلين وشاركت في فترة الاستقلال في بناء تونس الحديثة، وعرفت فيما بعد نقلة نوعية على جميع المستويات جعلت من المدينة قبلة الزوار من الداخل والخارج وجعلتها من أجمل مدن المتوسط.

الموقع الجغرافي
تقع مدينة المهدية (ويطلق عليها المدينة ذات الهلالين) على الساحل الشرقي بوسط الجمهورية التونسية وهي عبارة عن برزخ ممتد داخل البحر (شبه جزيرة) يحيط بها البحر من ثلاث جهات وهي ذات مناخ معتدل تؤثر فيها التيارات الهوائية للحوض المتوسط وتبعد عن العاصمة 200 كلم
إن انتماء المهدية إلى الساحل يجعلها تحت تأثير المناخ المتوسطي المعتدل المتميز بنسبة من الرطوبة. وتساهم الرياح البحرية والشمالية والشمالية الشرقية في تعديل درجات الحرارة صيفا وشتاء، وتبلغ نسبة التساقطات على الشريط الساحلي 300مم لتصل في بعض الأحيان إلى 400مم، ما يساهم في انتشار غطاء نباتي متنوع.

المناخ الثقافي
مثل المدينة العتيقة بالمهدية عاملا من عوامل تطور السياحة بالمنطقة وذلك لثراء مخزونها التراثي والتاريخي والثقافي، هذا إلى جانب اختلاف الأنشطة بهذه المدينة ومدى مواكبتها للتنمية التي تشهدها المهدية في مختلف مراحلها، ومساهمتها في استقطاب الوافدين على المدينة باعتبارها مسلكا سياحيا فريدا من نوعه.
فثراء المعالم الأثرية دليل على تعاقب الحضارات بالمدينة وتنوعها مما دفع بالبلدية إلى دعم مجهودات ترميم الآثار وصيانتها، كما تتميز المدينة العتيقة بطابع معماري مميز من حيث تنوع أشكال المعمار التقليدي ويرجع السبب في ذلك إلى اختلاف الوافدين قديما من مختلف الأصقاع.
كما يوجد فيها الجامع الكبير والقصبة التي تم بناءها أواخر القرن السادس عشر. وبين الجامع والقصبة آثار رومانية قديمة كثيرة.
تسير طريق جنوب المهدية عبر مزارع كثيرة يتم ريّها بواسطة الدلو الذي تقوم الحيوانات بتشغيله واستخراج
المياه من الآبار الكثيرة الموجودة في المنطقة، وهي عادة للري معروفة ومنتشرة في كل أنحاء المغرب، حتى تصل
الطريق إلى قصور الساف بمسافة 12 كلم جنوب المهدية، وهي مدينة صغيرة. يتفرع شارع إلى الشرق ناحية الجم.
وتستمر الطريق بمحاذات الساحل إلى شِبّه فوق الشاطئ الذي ينتهي داخل البحر ب (رأس قبودية) مع وجود ميناء صغير فيه، وبرج قديم من العصور الوسطى. ثم تتابع الطريق عبر التلال الخضراء حول جبنيانة حتى تصل جنوبا إلى مدينة صفاقس.
تتميز المهدية بأنها مركز نشط لصيادي الأسماك، لذا أنشأت فيها صناعة تعليب السمك، بالإضافة إلى الأعمال اليدوية والحرفية التقليدية.
سوق علي بابا
تتحوّل بوابة السقيفة الكحلة إلى سوق علي بابا، الشبيه بذلك الذي ورد في قصص ألف ليلة وليلة. وأثناء السوق الأسبوعية التي تقام يوم الجمعة في المدينة، يعرض النساء اللّواتي يشتغلن بالحياكة والتطريز والنسيج منتجاتهنّ من الملابس التقليديّة الغاية في الجمال، ومنسوجاتهن المصنوعة من الحرير المذّهب، ومصوغاتهن التقليدية ذات التصاميم المتنوعة. وتمثل زيارة هذه السوق فرصة للإطّلاع على هذه الصناعات التقليديّة النسويّة، التي تمثّل إحدى العلامات المميّزة للصناعات التقليديّة التونسيّة.
ويحتل التزيين الداخلي للمنازل التونسية مكاناً بارزاً في المهديّة بشكل خاص، حيث تصبح تحفة حقيقية، ويبدو ذلك واضحاً في منازل الأثرياء، خصوصاً في نهج الحمزوات الذي به العديد من المنازل الجميلة المبنيّة في أوائل القرن العشرين الميلادي من قبل أفراد عائلة واحدة. وتتميز المهديّة بذلك البهاء التقليدي المميّز للمدن البحريّة، فهي تضم ميناء صيد بحري يعد أحد أهم الموانيء في تونس، ويختصّ بصيد سمك الساردين بالإعتماد على الأضواء ليلاً، ممّا يجعل ليالي الصيف في هذا المدينة تتحوّل عند مغادرة سفن الصيد باتجاه البحر، إلى مناسبات فرح جميلة، حيث ينار الميناء والبحر بآلاف المصابيح، ويصبح شاطىء المدينة محل حركة كبيرة عند خيوط الفجر الأولى في أيّام فصل الصيف، ويخترق جنباته صراخ باعة السمك، ووصول مئات الصناديق من سمك الساردين والأنشوّجة، التي تم صيدها في أعالي البحار.

أهم المواقع الأثرية والتاريخية
باب الفتوح (أو باب زويلة)
«السقيفة الكحلة» كما تسمى حاليا: يعود بناء هذا المعلم إلى أوائل القرن الرابع هجري (303 هـ 308 هـ) الموافق لأوائل القرن العاشر ميلادي (916 م – 921 م)
وهو يمثل البرج الرئيسي للسور البري لمدينة المهدية، كما كان يمثل المدخل الوحيد للمدينة برا. يتكون باب زويلة من برج يبلغ علوه 18.50م في حين يبلغ عرضه حوالي 21 م وعمقه 12.70 م
وكذلك من ممر مغطى يؤدي مباشرة إلى الأسواق، يبلغ طوله 33 م وعرضه حوالي 5.10 م.
منذ أوائل القرن العاشر حتى أواسط القرن السادس عشر كان الممر يحتوي على ستة أبواب حديدية.
أدخلت على هذا المعلم العديد من التحويرات بعد هدم الأسوار من قبل الإسبان سنة 1555،
آخر هذه التحويرات سنة 1311 هـ الموافق لسنة 1893 م.

قصر القائم بأمر الله
بناه عبيد الله المهدي في أوائل القرن العاشر لإبنه وخليفته القائم بأمر الله، وتواصل استعماله كقصر من قبل الأمراء الزيريين،
وقد وقع هدمه واستعمال حجارته بعد الاحتلال الإسباني للمدينة (أواسط القرن السادس عشر). مكنت الحفريات الجارية
بهذا المعلم من اكتشاف فسيفساء تفوق مساحتها 60 م2 ومن الأرجح أنها كانت تزين أرضية القاعة الكبرى للقصر.

الجامع الكبير
تزامن بناء هذا الجامع مع تأسيس المدينة في أوائل القرن العاشر ميلادي (أوائل القرن الرابع هجري)،
وكان يعتبر الجامع الرئيسي المخصص للخليفة ولحاشيته. طرأت عليه عديد التغييرات خاصة في أواسط القرن السادس عشر ميلادي حيث حوله الإسبان إلى كنيسة ومقبرة لقواد الجيش. وقع تجديده سنة 1962
مع احترام مساحته الأصلية والإبقاء على واجهته الرئيسية ومدخله الذي يشبه قوس النصر الروماني.
ومن خصائصه انه لا يحتوي على مئذنة.

مصنع السفن (أو دار البحر)
هو ثاني مصنع للسفن أحدث بالمهدية الفاطمية، أسسه المعز لدين الله الفاطمي، كان يحتوي على مراسي سفن ومخازن مغطاة.
تواصل اشتغال هذا المصنع إلى العهد الحفصي حيث كان يعتبر خلال القرن السادس عشر ميلادي من أهم المصانع إلى جانب مصنعي تونس وبجاية.

الميناء القديم
يحتل هذا الميناء منخفضا يفصل بين مرتفع سيدي جابر ومرتفع البرج الكبير، على الساحل الجنوبي الشرقي لشبه جزيرة المهدية،
فهو يوجد إذن في موقع محمي من الرياح الشمالية الغربية ويفتح على مياه عميقة. أثبتت البحوث الحديثة أن هذا الميناء المنقور في الحجارة يعود إلى العهد البوني
وتواصل استعماله كمرسى للسفن التجارية والحربية إلى العهد العثماني (اواسط القرن 18 ميلادي).
تبلغ مساحة هذا الميناء المستطيل الشكل 8250 م2، في حين يفوق عمقه الأصلي 10 أمتار وبإمكانه احتواء 30 مركبا.
لا تزال آثار الأسوار المحيطة به وا البرجان اللذان يحرسان مدخله بارزة.

البرج العثماني
وقع بناءه في أواخر القرن السادس عشر ميلادي من قبل الأتراك العثمانيين عندما استقروا نهائيا بالمهدية.
ومن الأرجح أنه بني على أنقاض قصر عبيد الله المهدي، وهو برج عسكري مخصص لاحتواء الحامية الانكشارية.بني على انقاض البرج الفاطمي واسم مؤسسه لا يزال مكتوبا عليه رغم اختلاف المؤرخين في سبب إعادة بنائه فقد امر القبطان سنان باشا المهندس سنان اغا باعادة ترميمه الا انه وجده مدمرا تماما من الاسبان ومن جسن الحظ ان المخطط وجد في مكان ما جلبه احدهم إلى المهندس سنان اغا فبدا في إعادة بنائه مستعملا حجارة من كل مكان منها ما جلب من انقاض قصر الآمر بالله ابن عبيد الله المهدي ومنها ما جلب من مناطق أخرى واتم بناءه من فضل الله احمد باشا واسمه مكتوب على المعلم

جامع الحاج مصطفى حمزة
بني هذا الجامع على نفقة الحاج مصطفى حمزة سنة 1772. وقد شهد هذا المعلم عمليات توسيع وترميم عديدة
خاصة في القرن العشرين.
ويعتبر هذا الجامع من أهم المعالم الدينية الموجودة بمدينة المهدية نظرا لأنه يضم كل المقاييس المعمارية المميزة للمسجد الجامع في الفترة العثمانية.

المدينة العتيقة
تمثل المدينة العتيقة بالمهدية عاملا من عوامل تركز السياحة وتطورها بالمنطقة وذلك لثراء مخزونها التراثي والتاريخي والثقافي،
هذا إلى جانب اختلاف الأنشطة بهذه المدينة ومدى مواكبتها للتنمية التي تشهدها المهدية في مختلف مراحلها،
ومساهمتها في استقطاب الوافدين للمدينة باعتبارها مسلكا سياحيا فريدا من نوعه.
فثراء المعالم الأثرية دليل على تعاقب الحضارات بالمدينة وتنوعها مما دفع بالبلدية إلى دعم مجهودات ترميم الآثار وصيانتها،
كما تتميز المدينة العتيقة بطابع معماري مميز من حيث تنوع أشكال المعمار التقليدي ويرجع السبب في ذلك
إلى اختلاف الوافدين قديما من مختلف الأصقاع، وتسعى البلدية جاهدة للحفاظ على الطابع المعماري التقليدي وذلك من خلال:

التنسيق مع المعهد الوطني للتراث عند إسناد رخص البناء بالمدينة العتيقة.
اعتماد كراس شروط خصوصي لصيانة المدينة العتيقة.
إبراز دور «البيت المخبر» من حيث كيفية البناء وإعادة البناء وتكوين البنائين أصيلي الجهة
ويندرج هذا المشروع في إطار شبكة عالمية للمدن التاريخية الساحلية تحت إشراف منظمة اليونسكو وذلك حفاظا على الطابع المعماري التقليدي للمدينة العتيقة ومقاومة البناء الفوضوي.

المساهمة في تهيئة المنطقة بالتنسيق مع صندوق حماية وتهيئة المناطق السياحية من تعبيد الأنهج وتبليط الأزقة وتركيز التنوير التجميلي والتنوير العمومي...
إن المتأمل في المدينة العتيقة يلاحظ نوعا خاصا من التقسيم الحضري فهي شبه جزيرة تتوسطها الأحياء السكنية التي تستغل قرابة 45 % من المساحة الجملية للمدينة. ويربط التجمعات السكنية والمدينة الحديثة الحي التجاري أو ما يطلق عليه السوق العربي ويتسع ل: 35 % من المساحة أما المنطقة الثالثة المتبقية فهي المقبرة البحرية ومساحتها 20 % علما وأن المساحة الجملية للمدينة العتيقة تفوق الكلم مربع.
يقطن التجمعات السكنية قرابة 5500 ساكن تختلف أنشطتهم بين صيادين وفلاحين وموظفين (800 صياد- 1000 موظف...)
وأهم نشاط في المدينة هو نشاط الصيد البحري من حيث عدد المشتغلين في هذا القطاع وارتباط هذا النشاط بالحياة اليومية
لكافة متساكني المنطقة إذ هو مورد الرزق الأوحد لعدد كبير من العائلات.
أما بالنسبة للمنطقة التجارية فهي تضم 305 محل تجاري ومهني وخدماتي مقسمة كالآتي:
نوع النشاط العدد النسبة

محلات تجارية 172 56 %
محلات مهنية 84 27%
محلات خدماتية 49 17%
هذا إضافة إلى 5 مؤسسات إدارية وتعليمية واقتصادية عامة وتمثل عدد المحلات التي تتعاطى أنشطة للصناعات التقليدية 91 محلا أي بنسبة تقارب الـ 30 % من النشاط وتشمل خاصة صناعة المصوغ ونسيج الحرير.
ولمزيد تنشيط المدينة وخاصة الأحياء التجارية تجتهد البلدية بالتنسيق مع صندوق حماية وتهيئة المناطق السياحية على تهيئة هذه الأحياء إلى جانب حث أصحاب المحلات على تحسين واجهات محلاتهم والتعريف بالطابع المعماري التقليدي للمدينة العتيقة
كما تضم هذه المنطقة السوق المركزي و«سوق التركي» للصناعات التقليدية و«دار الهمة» للتعريف باللباس التقليدي ونقابة التوجيه السياحي و«دار الحرفي» إلى جانب تواجد المناطق الخضراء بساحة القاضي النعمان وساحة البيئة ومنطقة رأس إفريقيا (وراء المنارة البحرية).

وما يميز المنطقة التجارية كثافة المرافق الخدماتية والسياحية من مقاهي وآثار فهي إضافة إلى المعالم الأثرية للعهد الفاطمي (الجامع الكبير والسقيفة الكحلاء) أو العثماني (البرج الكبير) تتواجد المعالم الدينية الأخرى من جوامع وزوايا وكتاتيب ومدرسة قرآنية إلى جانب مقام الأولياء الصالحين التي توليها البلدية عناية فائقة من حيث الترميم والتعهد والصيانة والتجميل باعتبار هذه المعالم إرثا قيما.

المنشآت
المنشآت الشبابية والثقافية
المتحف الجهوي.
دار الشباب.
دار الثقافة.
نادي الشباب.
مكتبة عمومية جهوية.
ثلاث مكتبات للأطفال.

المنشآت الرياضية
مركب رياضي يحتوي على:

قاعة مغطاة
ملعبين معشبين
ملعب معشب اصطناعي
ملعب كرة قدم
فضاء للألعاب الفردية
قاعتين للتدريب مغطاة.

المنشآت التربوية والجامعية
كلية العلوم الاقتصادية والتصرف بالمهدية.
المعهد العالي للعلوم التطبيقية والتكنولوجيا بالمهدية
المعهد العالي للدراسات التطبيقية في الإنسانيات بالمهدية
المعهد الأعلى للإعلامية
المعهد العالي للفنون والحرف بالمهدية
المعهد العالي للدراسات التكنولوجية
معاهد ثانوية: 02
مدارس إعدادية: 04
مدارس المهن: 01
مدراس ابتدائية: 13
مدارس مختصة في التكوين: 04

منشآت الطفولة
منتزه الطفل والعائلة.
مركز إعلامية الطفل.
نوادي الأطفال: 05
رياض الأطفال: 17

العلاقات الخارجية
اختيار مدينة المهدية كمدينة نموذجية ضمن شبكة مدن ساحلية وتاريخية صغرى لمنظمة اليونسكو بالحوض المتوسط من خلال ملتقى اليونسكو الذي انتظم بمدينة المهدية من 21 إلى 24 جوان 1999. انطلاق مشروع البيت المخبر بالتعاون مع منظمة اليونسكو ومقاطعة اللوار اطلنتيك بفرنسا ومدرسة الهندسة والتعمير بتونس والمجلس الجهوي بولاية المهدية وجمعية صيانة مدينة المهدية ويتمثل المشروع في ترميم مسكن قديم على ملك البلدية وذلك باجراء تجارب بناء ورسكلة البنائين والمهندسين في كيفية البناء وإعادة البناء بالنمط التقليدي للحفاظ على الطابع المعماري التقليدي للمدينة العتيقة بالمهدية.
انجاز المشروع النموذجي لتثبيت الكثبان الرملية بشاطئ المهدية وبساهمة بلدية المهدية ووكالة حماي وتهيئة الشريط الساحلي وجمعية صيانة المدينة بالمهدية وبرنامج الأمم المتحدة للتنمية.
تنظيم ورشة عمل ميدانية دولية باشراف منظمة اليونسكو مقاطع الحجارة المهجورة: الرهانات ومشاريع التهيئة من 16 إلى 25 نوفمبر 2006 بمشاركة أساتذة وطلبة من تونس وكندا ولبنان وإيطاليا والمغرب حول تقديم أمثلة وتصورات في كيفية تهيئة وتثمين مقاطع الحجارة.
تهيئة الكنيسة القديمة قصد إعدادها كمركز ثقافي متعدد الاختصاصات إضافة إلى تهيئة ساحة اللوار الأطلسية بتمويل من مقاطعة اللوار الأطلسية الفرنسية والمجلس الجهوي لولاية المهدية وجمعية صيانة المدينة.
انتخاب مدينة المهدية كنائب رئيس لمجموعة المدن الأورومتوسطية لمدن المغرب العربي للمدة النيابية 2004-2006.
انطلاق المشروع النموذجي لرفع الفضلات المنزلية بالمدينة العتيقة في إطار برنامج مادباكت لمجموعة المدن الأورومتوسطية.
تبادل الخبرات في المجال البيئي مع بروكسل للتصرف البيئي.
انخراط مدينة المهدية في مشروع «شمس» لمجموعة المدن الأورومتوسطية الذي يهتم بالبرامج الإنسانية المستدامة في الأوساط الحضرية المتوسطية.
انخراط مدينة المهدية في منظومة أجندا 21 المحلية.
تبادل الخبرات في مجال الصيد البحري والسياحة مع مدينة مدزارا دال فالو الإيطالية.

أعلام المدينة
محمد المصمودي ولد 25 مايو 1925، سياسي ورجل دولة.
البشير التركي ولد بالمهدية في 21 مارس 1931 وتوفي بها يوم 14 أوت 2009. البشير التركي أحد أكبر علماء الذرّة في العالم.انتخب في عام 1969 رئيسا للوكالة الدولية للطاقة الذرية بالنمسا بتقديم من قبل دول عدم الانحياز ورغم معارضة الحكومة التونسية في عهد بورقيبة.


== مراجع ==


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 1,406
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahdia
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mahdia (arabe : المهدية  [mæhdiæ]) est une ville côtière tunisienne située au centre-est du pays, à environ 200 kilomètres au sud de la capitale Tunis. Chef-lieu du gouvernorat du même nom, elle constitue une municipalité comptant 51 833 habitants en 2014.
Construite à l'origine sur une presqu'île de 1 400 mètres de longueur sur 500 mètres de largeur, elle abrite l'un des premiers ports de pêche du pays. L'activité touristique pèse de plus en plus dans l'économie locale. La cité est un centre tertiaire qui a développé peu à peu un pôle d'enseignement supérieur, notamment avec l'établissement de l'Institut d'économie et de gestion en 1999.
Si le centre historique se situe sur la presqu'île, la ville s'est étendue vers l'intérieur des terres avec les quartiers d'Hiboun et de Zouila notamment.

Géographie
La ville de Mahdia est située au centre-est de la Tunisie ; son territoire est délimité au nord par le gouvernorat de Monastir, au sud par Ksour Essef et Sidi Alouane et à l'est par Bou Merdes.

Histoire
Sa situation géographique stratégique et ses fortifications permettent à la ville, connue successivement sous les noms de Jemma, Aphrodisium et Cap Africa, de jouer un rôle de premier plan dans le bassin méditerranéen jusqu'au XVIe siècle. Mahdia est tout d'abord un comptoir phénicien puis elle abrita probablement une agglomération punique. Sous la domination romaine, elle devient Aphrodisium. L'épave de Mahdia, remontant au Ier siècle av. J.-C. et chargée d'objets d'art athéniens a été retrouvée au XXe siècle (vers 1907) à six kilomètres au large de Mahdia ; elle fait de cette dernière l'un des plus riches sites de l'archéologie sous-marine en Tunisie.

L'année 916 voit l'arrivée du premier calife fatimide Ubayd Allah al-Mahdi qui ordonne la fondation de Mahdia, dont la construction s'étale sur cinq ans, et qui lui donne son nom actuel. La ville devient ainsi la capitale des Fatimides en 921 et le reste jusqu'en 973, date à laquelle Mahdia est remplacée par Le Caire. Assiégée durant huit mois (944-945) par les kharidjites sous la conduite de leur chef Abu Yazid, la ville résiste victorieusement. En 1057, les Zirides s'y réfugient face à la menace des Hilaliens.
En 1086-1087, pour faire cesser les attaques répétées des corsaires de cette région, notamment celles orchestrées par le souverain ziride Tamim (1062-1108), les grandes villes marchandes du nord du bassin méditerranéen — Gênes, Pise, Amalfi, Salerne et Gaète — arment des bâtiments et s'emparent de Mahdia.
L'attaque, menée par Hughes de Pise, bénéficie de l'aide de Rome ; elle implique également le seigneur Pantaleone d'Amalfi et reçoit le soutien de Mathilde de Toscane.

Bien que Mahdia soit prise, les Italiens ne parviennent pas à la conserver. L'argent du butin est dépensé dans la cathédrale de Pise et la construction d'une nouvelle église. L'historien des croisades Carl Erdmann (en) considère ce raid comme un précurseur direct de la première croisade, qui débute huit ans plus tard, car elle est menée sous la bannière de Saint Pierre contre un chef musulman. Le roi normand Roger II de Sicile l'occupe en 1148 et maintient son assise jusqu'à la chute de la ville, dans les premiers jours de 1160, aux mains des Almohades. La ville perd alors son importance politique au profit de Tunis mais n'en demeure pas moins un important port. La ville fait face au cours de son histoire à plusieurs sièges.

En 1390, devant la perte de ses positions commerciales en Tunisie en faveur de Venise, Gênes organise une expédition militaire à laquelle elle souhaite donner le caractère d'une nouvelle croisade, au prétexte de se venger de la piraterie des barbaresques contre les chrétiens ; la cité obtient l'assistance d'un corps de seigneurs franco-anglais, dont Louis II de Bourbon qui en prend le commandement. La place forte, défendue par les Berbères de Bougie, de Bône, de Constantine et d'autres régions du Maghreb, venus au secours des Tunisiens, résiste à toutes les attaques. Les Européens, que les mésintelligences ne tardent pas à diviser, sont obligés de reprendre la mer après 61 jours de combats infructueux.
Mahdia est prise au XVIe siècle par le corsaire Dragut qui en fait son repaire. Charles Quint s'empare (en) de la ville en 1550 et les Espagnols y restent jusqu'en 1554.
En repartant, ils font sauter les remparts que les Ottomans ne reconstruisent que partiellement à leur retour. La ville retrouve peu à peu son calme et devient l'un des plus grands ports de pêche de Tunisie.

Architecture et urbanisme
Mahdia compte quelques monuments et sites historiques dignes d'intérêt.
La Skifa El Kahla ou Bab Zouila, une importante porte fortifiée datant à l'origine du Xe siècle (élevée entre 916 et 921) puis restaurée au XVIe siècle, constitue encore l'un des points d'accès au centre historique de la ville et l'un des rares vestiges des anciens remparts ; Borj El Kebir, une forteresse, dotée d'un passage voûté et courbé menant dans une cour imposante, surveille depuis 1595 la pointe du cap Afrique.
La grande mosquée, fondée en 916 par le chiite Ubayd Allah al-Mahdi, a la particularité d'être dépourvue de minaret ; elle a subi plusieurs modifications et rénovations pour être finalement reconstruite entre 1961 et 1965 conformément au premier plan du Xe siècle.
La mosquée Hadj Mustapha Hamza, construite en 1772 puis restaurée au cours du XXe siècle, constitue un bel exemple d'architecture religieuse à l'époque ottomane.
Mahdia est aussi connue pour son cimetière marin situé en front de mer, au bout de la presqu'île.

Culture
Musée
La ville de Mahdia possède un musée, à vocation régionale, installé dans les anciens locaux de la municipalité qui ont été entièrement rénovés pour accueillir les collections. Inauguré en 1997, ses collections présentent plusieurs pièces dont des céramiques appartenant aux périodes puniques et romaines, un bel ensemble de mosaïques, un trésor d'époque byzantine avec ses 268 monnaies d'or ainsi que divers objets de la période islamique.

Éducation
La ville de Mahdia accueille plusieurs établissements d'enseignement comme la faculté des sciences économiques et de gestion, l'Institut supérieur des sciences appliquées et de technologie et l'Institut supérieur des arts et métiers.

Économie
Aujourd'hui, l'économie de Mahdia est principalement axée sur le tourisme, la pêche et l'huile d'olive.
Le port de pêche est très animé à certaines heures, et possède ses propres conserveries conditionnant le poisson bleu. On peut y admirer des chalutiers équipés pour la pêche au lamparo (nocturne).
La ville située à l'est d'une grande oliveraie abrite des huileries permettant de produire de l'huile d'olive mais aussi du savon (produit à base de 72 % d'huile d'olive).
La ville est aussi connue pour ses tissages (soie et laine) et son artisanat (bijoux, cuir, bois, etc.). Un village de l'artisanat, voué à la formation des artisans de la région et à la commercialisation de leurs produits, est inauguré en 2019.
Les plages de sable blanc, les nombreux hôtels et l'histoire tourmentée de la cité en font une station balnéaire appréciée. La zone touristique est située au nord de la ville, plus précisément en face du quartier de Hiboun ; la grande majorité des hôtels de la ville se trouvent en bord de mer et leur offre variée.
La ville dispose aussi depuis 2007 d'un centre d'affaires destiné à la création d'entreprises d'intérêt public économique.

Transport
La ville est desservie par plusieurs axes d'importance nationale, de même qu'une bretelle autoroutière reliée à l'autoroute A1. Par ailleurs, plusieurs lignes ferroviaires la relient vers Sousse, Sfax ou Monastir (Métro du Sahel).
Mahdia ne possède pas d'aéroport propre mais se situe à une heure environ de l'aéroport international de Monastir Habib-Bourguiba.

Sport
Le football et le handball sont les sports réputés de la région avec le club omnisports d'El Makarem de Mahdia, plusieurs fois champion national et continental en handball. Le basket-ball y est aussi représenté avec le Basket Club Mahdia.

Coopération et jumelage
La municipalité de Mahdia a signé de nombreux accords de coopération et de jumelage avec diverses villes :

 Le Caire (Égypte)
 Mazara del Vallo (Italie)
 Saint-Nazaire (France)
 Aveiro (Portugal)

Personnalités
Notes et références
Voir aussi
Bibliographie
Néji Jalloul et Abderrazak Khéchine, Mahdia : capitale des Fâtimides, Sousse, Contraste, 2003, 80 p. (ISBN 978-9-973-87803-8).
Alexandre Lézine, Mahdiya, Tunis, Société tunisienne de diffusion, 1968, 58 p.
Abdelkader Masmoudi, Mahdia : étude de géographie urbaine, Tunis, Université de Tunis, 1984, 423 p.

Articles connexes
Phare de Mahdia
Église Notre-Dame-du-Mont-Carmel de Mahdia

Liens externes

(ar) Site officiel
Ressource relative aux beaux-arts : Grove Art Online  

 Portail de la Tunisie   Portail de la mer Méditerranée


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikivoyage (en) | Words: 203
URL: https://en.wikivoyage.org/wiki/Mahdia
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Overview
Mahdia is a city in Northern Tunisia, set along a superb coastline with a blue sea, as well as historical town full of tradition.

## By train
There are regular train services from Tunis, Sousse and Monastir, all to the north, operated by SNCFT.
35.50083311.0645441 Mahdia railway station (Gare Mahdia).      (updated Mar 2019)

## See
35.50523811.0762941 Bordj el Kebir Fortress.     (updated Mar 2019)
35.50389611.0720542 Great Mosque of Mahdiya. Located on the southern side of the peninsula on which the old city was located; built in 916 CE, after the founding of the city within the walls built by the Caliphate on an artificial platform reclaimed from the sea.
35.50386611.0686333 Skifa Kahla. Also known as Bab Zouila, the gate is part of the ancient ramparts built in the 10th century by the Fatimids.     (updated Mar 2019)

## Do
Morning running on the beach
Artistic workshops in Beit El Makhbar

## Buy
Fresh fish from the local market

## Eat
Chapati
Lablabi

## Sleep
35.51287611.0496111 Iberostar Royal El Mansour & Thalasso, Route de la Corniche, B.P 217. One of the largest resort hotels in Mahdia, located reasonably close to the city centre.    (updated Mar 2019)

## Go next
Sousse
Monastir
Kairouan
El Jem



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
ZAGHOUAN
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: town
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:57:03


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 415
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zaghouan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zaghouan or Zaghwan (Arabic: زغوان, romanized: Zaġwān, pronounced [zaʁˈwɛːn] ; Andalusian Arabic: إِسْطَوَان, romanized: Isṭawán) is a town in the northern half of Tunisia.
Situated on a low ridge of the Dorsale Mountains, the town has a mild climate and presents a green aspect. Cold water from here was taken by the Zaghouan Aqueduct to Carthage. The town is famous for its roses, originally cultivated by Muslim refugees from Spain in the seventeenth century. The town is located around 60 km due south of Tunis and around 50 km inland (west) from the Gulf of Hammamet and has an estimated population of around 20,837 (2014). It is the capital of the Zaghouan Governorate.
On the mountain south of the city is the Roman Water Temple Djebel Zaghouan (Temple de Eaux), source of an aqueduct which used to take water to the city of Carthage over 100 km away. The ruins here are illustrated in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1840, as 'Temple and Fountain of Zagwhan', the painting being by Sir Greenville Temple with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon.

Ecclesiastical history
Etymology
The etymology of "Zaghouan" is thought to derive from the Andalusian Arabic إِسْطَوَان (Isṭawán), which in turn comes from the Arabic أُسْطُوَانَة (usṭuwānah) meaning 'pillar'. This origin is linked to the settlement of Andalusian Moors in the area at the beginning of the 17th century. In Spanish, the term zaguán refers to a hallway or vestibule, typically serving as a transitional space between the exterior and interior of a building.
However, Zaghouan is the presumed site of the ancient city of Zica or Ziqua, which may have been the source of the modern name. The city was among the many of sufficient importance in the Roman province of Africa Proconsularis to become a suffragan diocese of the Metropolitan of Carthage, in the papal sway, yet was to fade completely, probably at the seventh century advent of Islam.
Its historically documented bishops were :

Donatist schismatic Donatus attended the Council of Carthage in 411, where his heresy was condemned as such by the Catholic bishops, among whom Zica had no counterpart
Vincentius intervened at the Council of Carthage in 484 called by king Huneric of the Vandal Kingdom, and was afterwards exiled like most Catholic bishops.

Climate
Gallery
See also
List of Catholic dioceses in Tunisia

Notes
References
Sources and external links
GCatholic - (former &) titular see of Zica
Bibliography - Zica bishopric
J. Mesnage, L'Afrique chrétienne, Paris 1912, pp. 237–238


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 496
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zaghouan
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zaghouan (arabe : زغوان  [zæʁuɛːn]) est une ville du nord de la Tunisie et le chef-lieu du gouvernorat du même nom. Établie sur le versant du djebel Zaghouan, elle domine une vaste plaine agricole. 20 798 habitants la peuplent en 2014.

Géographie
Zaghouan est située à environ 60 km au Sud de Tunis et à environ 50 km de la côte du golfe d'Hammamet. À l'emplacement de la ville antique Ziqua, dont il ne subsiste qu'une porte triomphale, Zaghouan a des rues escarpées et coupées de petites places offrant des échappées sur la plaine.

Histoire
Sur la montagne au sud de la ville, le djebel Zaghouan, se trouve le temple des Eaux, nymphée-théâtre d'une source alimentant l'aqueduc construit, peut-être de 120 à 131, pour acheminer l'eau du djebel jusqu'à Carthage, située à 90 kilomètres avec une déclivité étudiée de 0,29 %. Les ruines du nymphée originel (de type basilique) ont été découvertes en 2001 à proximité, le temple datant quant à lui de la période séverine. Les statues qui ornaient le Temple, celles de Neptune ainsi que douze naïades, sont pour la plupart exposées au musée national du Bardo.
En 1859, alors que l'aqueduc ne fonctionne plus depuis trois siècles, le ministre de Sadok Bey, Mustapha Khaznadar, décide de le faire restaurer, sur les conseils du consul de France de l'époque, Léon Roches, et avec le concours de l'ingénieur français, Pierre Colin. Les parties du canal à fleur de sol et en sous-sol sont remises en état et les parties sur arcades sont remplacées par des conduites en fonte. De nos jours, seuls les soixante premiers kilomètres de l'ouvrage sont utilisés par la Société nationale d'exploitation et de distribution des eaux.

Patrimoine
La ville est connue pour ses roses, notamment l'églantier (ancêtre botanique de la rose), qui étaient cultivées par les musulmans andalous (Morisques) chassés d'Espagne au XVIIe siècle lors de la Reconquista. L'eau de fleur d'églantier (نسري, soit nesri en arabe) est utilisée pour aromatiser des pâtisseries comme les baklavas, mais surtout les kâak warka au nesri dont la recette transmise de mère en fille est une célébrité culinaire de la ville et fait l'objet d'un festival.
Le 17 février 2012, le gouvernement tunisien propose le complexe hydraulique romain de Zaghouan-Carthage dont l'aqueduc de Zaghouan fait partie pour un futur classement sur la liste du patrimoine mondial de l'humanité dressée par l'Unesco. Il présente celui-ci comme « le plus grand complexe du genre jamais réalisé » et estime également que les restaurations et réparations du complexe n'ont pas altéré son intégrité et son authenticité.

Tourisme
Région réputée pour ses sources (aïns), Zaghouan attire aussi bien les Tunisiens que les touristes du monde arabe par ses hammams — l'un des plus connus est sans nul doute le hammam de la ville de Zriba située à huit kilomètres de Zaghouan — et son eau de rose.

Notes et références
Liens internes
Église Sainte-Hélène de Zaghouan
Aqueduc de Zaghouan

Liens externes

(ar) Site officiel

 Portail de la Tunisie



====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================
TESTOUR
====================================================================================================
====================================================================================================

Country: Tunisia
Type: town
Historical Era: Various
Collected: 2025-11-22 19:57:11


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 139
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Testour
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Testour (Arabic: تستور ) is a town located in the north of Tunisia. The town is perched on the hills of Medjerda Valley, 20 km (12 mi) south-west of Medjez-el-Bab, the crossroads between Tunis, Béja, and the north of Tunisia.  It was known during the Roman period, as Tichilla, which means the green grass as it is situated in the mouth of Siliana valley. It was rebuilt in the 1500s by Muslim and Jewish refugees from Andalusia who gave it a distinctive character in building and layout. Today it is a popular pilgrimage for Jews who visit Rabbi Fraji Chawat's tomb.
The city host an international festival of Malouf and traditional Maghrebi music since 1967.

Twin towns – sister cities
Testour is twinned with:

 Chefchaouen, Morocco
 Serpa, Portugal
 Gibellina, Italy

References
External links
Overview of Testour
Guide of Testour


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-FR (fr) | Words: 227
URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Testour
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Testour (arabe : تستور ) est une ville du Nord-Ouest de la Tunisie, située à 77 km au sud-ouest de Tunis.
Rattachée au gouvernorat de Béja, elle constitue une municipalité de 13 331 habitants en 2014 et constitue le chef-lieu d'une délégation.

Histoire
Elle est devenue l'une des grandes villes maures après la migration de ces derniers vers la Tunisie aux environs de 1580. Fondée principalement par des descendants d'Andalous des régions traversées par le Guadalquivir, elle est bâtie, au début du XVIIe siècle (vers 1609), sur la Medjerda en lieu et place du village romain de Tachilla. Sa Grande Mosquée bâtie durant le premier tiers du XVIIe siècle, probablement avant 1631, ses ruelles et ses maisons de plus de 400 ans en font l'une des villes les plus anciennes de Tunisie.

Culture
La ville abrite un festival international de malouf et de musique arabe et traditionnelle à partir de 1967.
Le Festival de la grenade est initié à Testour en 2016, avec une première édition visant à promouvoir le potentiel économique du fruit dans la région. Il devient ensuite un rendez-vous annuel contribuant à la valorisation du patrimoine local.

Personnalités
Références
Bibliographie
Ahmed Hamrouni, Testour : histoire et récits de voyage, Carthage, MC-Editions, 1995 (ISBN 9973-9744-0-9).
Ahmed Hamrouni, Testour : documents et études, Carthage, MC-Editions, 2000, 207 p. (ISBN 9973-807-13-8).

Liens externes

 Portail de la Tunisie

