

====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: CASBAH OF ALGIERS
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: historical_district | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 17:59:05
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 15,904
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casbah_of_Algiers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Casbah of Algiers, commonly referred to as the Casbah (Arabic: القصبة, Al-qaṣabah, meaning "citadel"), corresponds to the old town or medina of Algiers, the capital of Algeria. It is a historic district that has been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1992. Administratively, it is located within the municipality of Casbah, in the province of Algiers.
Likely inhabited since the Neolithic period, as were various sites in the Algiers Sahel, the first mentions of the city date back to Antiquity, when it was initially a Phoenician port, later becoming Berber and eventually Roman. The current urban framework was designed in the 10th century by the Berbers under the Zirid dynasty, later enriched by contributions from other Berber dynasties that successively ruled the central Maghreb. The Casbah reached its peak during the period of the Regency of Algiers, serving as the seat of political power. Colonized by the French in 1830, it was gradually marginalized as power centers shifted to the new city. During the Algerian War, the Casbah played a crucial role, as a stronghold for FLN independence fighters. After Algeria gained independence in 1962, the Casbah did not reclaim its former central role and remained a marginalized city area.
An example of Islamic architecture and urban planning characteristic of Arab-Berber medinas, the Casbah is also a symbol of Algerian culture, a source of artistic inspiration, and home to an ancestral artisanal heritage. Local actors continue to fight to preserve and sustain its tangible and intangible heritage.

Etymology
More generally, a kasbah is the walled citadel of many North African cities and towns. The name made its way into English from French in the late 19th century (the Oxford English Dictionary states 1895), and can be spelled "kasbah" or "casbah".

Geography
Toponymy
The Casbah of Algiers takes its name from the citadel that overlooks it (designated in Arabic as القصبة, Al-Kasbah). Originally, the term "Casbah" referred to the highest point of the medina—the old city—of the Zirid era. Over time, it came to designate the entire medina, which was enclosed by the ramparts built during the Regency of Algiers in the 16th century.

Location and topography
The Casbah is located at the center of Algiers and forms its historic core. The city has historically occupied a strategic position, as its geographical location is central within Algeria and the Maghreb. Facing the Mediterranean Sea, it is built on terrain with a 118-meter elevation difference. At first glance, the Casbah appears as a cluster of houses built on a slope. The narrow and winding streets make it a car-free zone, where supply deliveries and waste collection are still traditionally done using donkeys. The district forms a triangular shape, with its base meeting the Bay of Algiers, giving it, when viewed from the sea, the appearance of a "colossal pyramid" or a "triangular amphitheater". The whiteness of its houses and their arrangement have inspired poetic descriptions from writers who liken Algiers to a "sphinx". The citadel, overlooking the medina, gives it the appearance of a "well-guarded city", earning it the Arabic nickname El Djazaïr El Mahroussa ("Algiers the Protected"). This reputation extended to Europe, where the memory of Charles V's failed invasion in 1541 persisted until the French landing in 1830.
The site's occupation dates back to the Punic era, with the earliest known trace dating from the late 6th century BCE. At that time, the Carthaginians sought to establish a network of trading posts along the southern Mediterranean coast to control commercial flows, including gold from sub-Saharan Africa, silver from Spain, and tin from the Cassiterides Islands. This system, known as "Punic scales," provided sailors with sheltered stopovers where they could trade goods. The site of Algiers, then called Ikosim, featured small islands suitable for mooring and served as a relay between two Punic settlements, Bordj el Bahri (Rusguniae) and Tipaza, spaced 80 kilometers apart.
The location was protected by the Bab-el-Oued coastline on one side and by Agha Bay on the other, which was exposed to north and east winds and contained four small islands near the shore. On the coast, a 250-meter promontory provided refuge. The Bouzaréah massif supplied limestone for construction, while the surrounding area provided clay for bricks and access to fresh water. The city's port function was later confirmed by the Cordoban geographer Al-Bakri in the 11th century, who described Algiers as being protected by a harbor, islands, and a bay, making it a winter anchorage point. Throughout history, the site served not only as a refuge for commercial ships but also as a haven for pirates and corsairs.

Hinterland
The Bouzaréah massif, reaching an altitude of 400 meters, is part of the Algiers Sahel, which extends into the Mitidja plain and, further south, the Atlas Mountains, making Algiers an important outlet. This hinterland contributed to the city's wealth through agricultural production, including livestock farming and beekeeping. Since the Middle Ages, the city has been characterized by the presence of agricultural landowners, a strong commercial tradition, and its status as a major Mediterranean port, exporting various local products. This economic prosperity attracted numerous conquerors who successively ruled the Maghreb. Algiers is also located on the outskirts of Kabylia and, starting in the 16th century, became the primary destination for migrants from the region, surpassing Béjaïa, another major city in the central Maghreb. As a result, Algiers drew not only Kabylian agricultural products but also its labor force.

Hydrogeology
Water for the old medina comes from the Algiers Sahel and the groundwater of Hamma, Hydra, and Ben Aknoun. It was originally transported through a network of aqueducts dating from the Regency of Algiers, which remains in place but has been replaced by a modern distribution system developed in the early 20th century.
During the Regency of Algiers, the Casbah was supplied by four main aqueducts, some of which remained functional until the early 20th century. These aqueducts sourced water from nearby areas, including the Sahel, Telemly, Hamma, Hydra, and Bitraria. Groundwater was drawn using norias (water wheels) and collected in reservoirs to increase the aqueducts' flow. A system of filtering galleries also helped capture minor water veins. After passing through the aqueducts, the water was stored in reservoirs at the city's gates, from where it was distributed via pipelines to various fountains. The aqueducts were built between 1518 and 1620 and ran through the Fahs (the rural outskirts) to supply the medina. They did not rely solely on gravitational flow but employed the souterazi (siphon towers) technique. This method involved directing water through an elevated pillar, which, although it appeared to slow the flow, offered key advantages: releasing air pressure, balancing water levels across different channels, and ensuring relative control over the flow rate. This souterazi technique was also used in Constantinople and in some cities of Spain and the Maghreb.
The water sources originate from an area with limestone outcrops, gneiss, and granulite veins resting on a schist base. In addition to aqueducts and fountains, domestic wells—ranging from 50 to 70 meters deep and drilled into gneiss or schist layers—further contributed to the Casbah's water supply.

History
The Casbah of Algiers is an ancient medina with millennia-old origins, taking into account the site's Punic and Roman past. It is considered a cultural asset of global importance due to its ancient heritage and the history it embodies.

Prehistory
There are no traces of prehistoric settlement in the Casbah itself. However, given evidence of prehistoric habitation in the immediate surroundings (the Algiers Sahel), it is likely that such traces were simply obscured by the site's long-standing, dense, and continuous urbanization, and that it too was inhabited as early as the Neolithic period.

The Punic, Numidian and Roman Antiquity
The exact date of the Phoenician establishment of ancient Algiers (Ikosim) remains uncertain, but it likely occurred after the late 6th century BCE. It appears that two ports were founded in the Bay of Algiers: Rusguniae (Bordj El Bahri) in the east, which provided shelter from westerly winds, and Ikosim (Algiers) in the west, which protected from easterly winds. From this period, a Punic stele was discovered on Rue du Vieux Palais in Algiers, along with a stone sarcophagus found in 1868 in the Marengo Garden containing period jewelry, and numerous coins in the Marine district.
These 158 Punic lead and bronze coins, dating from the 2nd to 1st century BCE, bear the inscription "IKOSIM," confirming the ancient name of Algiers, which had previously been assumed but unproven. According to Cantineau, the Punic etymology of Ikosim derives from two combined words: i, meaning "island", and kosim, meaning "owl" or alternatively "thorn". Thus, the ancient name of Algiers, Ikosim, translates to either "Island of Owls" or "Island of Thorns." Victor Bérard, supported by Carcopino, preferred the translation "Island of Seagulls." An ancient well was also discovered in the Marine district, containing pottery fragments from various periods. Other remains from antiquity indicate trade relations with the northern Mediterranean (Gaul, Spain, southern Italy) from the 3rd to 1st century BCE and, later, Roman presence until the 5th century CE.
The fall of Carthage in 146 BCE did not bring significant changes for Ikosim, which became part of the Numidian kingdom and later fell under the influence of the Mauri kingdom ruled by King Bocchus and his successors. Mauretania, which corresponds to this western part of North Africa, remained independent until 40 CE, when, after a period of rule by vassal kings such as Ptolemy of Mauretania, it came under the domination of the Roman Empire. The name Ikosim was Latinized into Icosium, and Roman settlers began arriving as early as the period of the vassal kings, even before the Roman conquest. As a result, the city saw the early establishment of Roman magistrates, as evidenced by an honorary Latin inscription dedicated to King Ptolemy, discovered on Hadj Omar Street in the Casbah. Another inscription referring to Ptolemy is found on a slab within the minaret of the Great Mosque.
By 40 CE, the Mauritanian kingdom was reduced to a Roman province under Emperor Caligula. Icosium was administered by a procurator-governor based in Caesarea (modern-day Cherchell). Emperor Vespasian later granted Icosium Latin rights, elevating it to the status of a Roman city, though with fewer privileges than full Roman colonies.
The city's ancient walls likely defined an area similar to that occupied during the Ottoman Regency of Algiers, though habitation was concentrated near the coast, with steeper slopes probably used as gardens. Above the densely populated lower city, the higher ground likely housed residential districts, all surrounded by rural villas. Various Roman-era remains discovered around the Casbah site indicate the layout of an ancient road leading toward the Belouizdad district.
The ancient necropolises, located outside the city in accordance with Roman customs, provide an even more refined indication of the perimeter of the city of Icosium. The discovered tombs indicate that burials were located to the north and northwest of the city, a historical constant observed during the Berber and Turkish periods, and continuing to this day with the Saint-Eugène cemetery. This cemetery is notable for being two kilometers away from the Casbah, whereas cemeteries were traditionally placed directly beneath city walls.
It is difficult to trace the axes of the ancient city due to numerous alterations in the urban fabric. However, the lower Casbah was partially replaced by a modern colonial-era city that follows the layouts and axes already established in antiquity.
Little is known about the city's economic life, which was likely centered around its port.
Religious life was initially dedicated to the Roman pantheon. At an undetermined date, the city became Christian, with several Donatist and Catholic bishops. Remains from this period were discovered during excavations in the 2000s, linked to the construction of the Algiers metro and the redevelopment of Place des Martyrs. Among the findings was a Roman basilica adorned with mosaics, whose central space spanned nearly 10 meters, likely dating back to the 3rd or 4th century, as well as a Byzantine-era necropolis.
There is little information about the following centuries, except for the sacking of the city by Firmus in 371 or 372. The ancient history of Icosium then fades into that of the province of Mauretania and later the Byzantine domination, until the founding of the present-day medina—El Djazaïr Beni Mezghana—by Bologhin Ibn Ziri in 960, marking a new chapter in the city's history.

The Zirid period and Central Maghreb under Berber dynasties
The Casbah corresponds to the old city of Algiers, the medina, built by Bologhin Ibn Ziri in 960 on the ruins of the ancient Roman city of Icosium, in the territory of the Berber tribe of the Beni Mezghenna. This 10th-century foundation appears confirmed by the fact that no authors from the Arab conquest period mention it, and it is only in the 10th century that Eastern writers begin to reference it. The name given by Bologhin Ibn Ziri is believed to be a reference to the islands that once faced Algiers' port and were later attached to its current jetty. In Arabic, Al-Djaza’ir (الجزائر) means "The Islets." Other hypotheses, notably by the Andalusian scholar Al-Bakri, suggest that the correct name is the one preserved in the city's oral tradition—Dzeyer—which would be a tribute to Ziri, the city's founder. To this day, Algiers' inhabitants refer to themselves as Dziri.
Ibn Hawkal, a Baghdad-based merchant, described the city in the 10th century:

The city of Algiers is built on a gulf and surrounded by a wall. It contains many bazaars and a few sources of fresh water near the sea, from which the inhabitants draw their drinking water. In the city's outskirts, there are vast fields and mountains inhabited by several Berber tribes. The inhabitants' main wealth consists of herds of cattle and sheep grazing in the mountains. Algiers produces so much honey that it becomes an export commodity, and the quantities of butter, figs, and other goods are so great that they are exported to Kairouan and beyond.
From the 10th to the 16th century, according to Louis Leschi, Algiers was a Berber city surrounded by Berber tribes who practiced cereal farming in the Mitidja or livestock herding in the Atlas, generating significant revenue through trade. Around 985, Al-Muqaddasi visited the city and echoed Ibn Hawkal's observations. Al-Bakri later highlighted Algiers' rich ancient heritage, noting the presence of a dār al-mal‛ab (theater or amphitheater), mosaics, and church ruins. He also mentioned many souks (leswak) and a large mosque (masgid al-ǧāmi). He described the port as well-sheltered and frequented by sailors from Ifriqiya, Spain, and "other countries".
Algiers fell under Almoravid control in 1082 when their ruler, Yusuf Ibn Tashfin, built the Great Mosque of Algiers (Jamaa el Kebir). In 1151, Abd al-Mumin, a Zenata Berber from Nedroma, took Algiers from the Almoravids and became the Almohad caliph, ruling over the entire Maghreb and Andalusia.
In the 14th century, the Arab tribe of the Tha'alaba established a local stronghold around the city, forming a local magistrate dynasty known as a "bourgeois senate". Al-Djazaïr survived by remaining a vassal state to the Zianids of Tlemcen, who built the minaret of the Great Mosque, the Hafsids of Tunis, and the Marinids of Fez, who constructed the Bou Inania madrasa.
However, Algiers' growing piracy activity led Ferdinand of Aragon, following the Reconquista, to seize and fortify the islet in front of the city (the Peñón) to neutralize it. Seeking to free the city from Spanish control, Salim at-Toumi, Algiers' leader, called upon Aruj Barbarossa. This marked the beginning of the Regency of Algiers, during which the city became the capital of the Central Maghreb.

The regency of Algiers
The Barbarossa brothers permanently expelled the Spanish from the Peñón islet in 1529. Aruj Barbarossa then decided to establish a real port by connecting the islet to the mainland, creating Algiers' jetty and admiralty, as well as a harbor for ships. These developments allowed the city to become the primary base for corsairs in the western Mediterranean. Algiers became the capital of its regency, and the term Al Jazâ'ir was used in international documents to refer to both the city and the territory it controlled. Charles V launched the Algiers expedition in 1541, but it failed. In response, the city's defenses were reinforced, especially along the coast. Algiers was enclosed by a fortified wall with gates such as Bab Azoun, Bab El Oued, Bab J'did, and Bab Dzira, and was protected by a series of forts built between the 16th and 17th centuries: Lefanar, Goumen, Ras el Moul, Setti Taklit, Zoubia, Moulay Hasan (renamed Fort l’Empereur after the French occupation), Qama’at El Foul, and Mers Debban. Later, the Bordj J'did (1774), as well as the Lebhar and Ma-Bin forts in the early 19th century, were constructed.
The fortress overlooking the city was built between 1516 (started by Aruj Barbarossa) and 1592 (completed under Kheder Pasha). However, the Regency's rulers initially governed from the Djenina Palace, known locally as dar soltan el kedim, which was demolished during the colonial period. It only became the ruler's residence in 1817 under Ali-Khodja, the second-to-last dey of Algiers. Seeking to escape the tyranny of the militia, he abandoned the centrally located Djenina Palace and transferred the public treasury to the Casbah, where he barricaded himself with a personal guard of 2,000 Kabyles.
Apart from agricultural and manufactured products, the city derives its income from the corso: the "Barbary piracy." Slavery is also practiced, mainly for domestic work, and there is a significant presence of European captives. These captives, whose living conditions are relatively mild when ransom is possible, endure a much harsher existence when they are employed in the galleys. The government, or beylik, collects a portion of the revenues from maritime raids in the Mediterranean. These revenues help finance the militia and fund public works (such as the sewage system and aqueducts). The corsairs, called reïs, and the notable figures of the beylik build luxurious residences in the lower part of the city, while Arab families primarily settle in the upper part. The golden age of piracy in the 17th century leads to a series of European expeditions, in the form of bombardments of the city. It also faces earthquakes (1716 and 1755) and plague epidemics (1740, 1752, 1787, and 1817). These factors, combined with economic decline and political instability, cause the city's population to shrink. From over 100,000 inhabitants in the 17th century, the population drops to around 30,000 by 1830.

On April 30, 1827, the Casbah witnesses the famous "fan incident," which serves as a pretext for the French conquest of Algiers on July 5, 1830, during the reign of Charles X. Its last occupant is Dey Hussein. Count and Marshal de Bourmont resides there in July 1830 after the city's capture.

French colonial period
The French army enters Algiers on July 5, 1830. French presence drastically changes the city's appearance and its medina. The French transform the city by demolishing a large part of the lower Casbah and building what is now "Place des Martyrs." Originally extending to the sea, the Casbah is pushed into the background by the new waterfront with its arcaded architecture. Colonization also introduces new roads that surround and penetrate the Casbah. Architecturally, the French introduce the Haussmannian style and demolish the old city's walls.
The period of demolitions lasts until 1860 when Napoleon III halts the policy and sides with the mufti of the Great Mosque of Algiers, preventing further mosques from being converted into churches, as had happened with the Ketchaoua Mosque and the Ali Bitchin Mosque.
Later in the colonial period, a neo-Moorish architectural movement emerges, with its most famous landmarks being the Thaâlibiyya Medersa in 1904 and the Algiers Grand Post Office in 1913. The "Arab city" is traditionally centered around its mosque and souk, but colonization introduces a new spatial organization. Algiers becomes a city where the old and new, the sacred and the secular, coexist, reshaping spaces of social interaction.

With the construction of new European neighborhoods, the Casbah—once the entirety of Algiers in 1830—begins to be perceived as a marginal, residual, and unstable urban area, as economic and political centrality shifts to these new districts. However, it retains social spaces such as mosques, Moorish cafés, plazas (rahba), and hammams. This pattern persists even after independence, and the Casbah never regains its former significance.

The Algerian war
The nationalist movement, which develops in the early 20th century, intensifies in the 1950s, leading to the Algerian War. The Casbah becomes a stronghold of nationalists.
In 1956, newly elected by the "Soummam Congress," the members of the CCE (Coordinating and Executive Committee)—Abane Ramdane, Larbi Ben M'hidi, Krim Belkacem, Saad Dahlab, and Benyoucef Benkhedda—decide to establish themselves in the Casbah. They believe it offers greater control over FLN militants, better communication links, and, most importantly, complete clandestinity. With its hideouts, numerous couriers lost among the masses, and various forms of protection, the capital is seen as an ideal base for urban guerrilla warfare, which they consider as crucial as fighting in the mountains.
The Casbah is the key battleground of the "Battle of Algiers" in 1957. This battle pits Yacef Saadi, head of the Autonomous Zone of Algiers (ZAA) and the independence fighters, against General Massu's 10th Parachute Division. On the ground, the "battle" is won by the French army, which dismantles the FLN networks and the political-administrative organization of the Autonomous Zone of Algiers, using methods later systematized: intelligence gathering by any means, including torture, and from June 1957 onwards, converting and manipulating captured fighters. The streets leading from the Casbah to the European quarters are sealed off with barbed wire and monitored by police and Zouaves.
Captain Léger's infiltration of Yacef Saadi's courier network allows for Saadi's capture on September 23, 1957, at 3 Rue Caton in the Casbah. In October, the FLN enforcer Ali la Pointe, cornered with his comrades Hassiba Ben Bouali, Hamid Bouhmidi, and Petit Omar at 5 Rue des Abderrames, is killed when French paratroopers of the 1st REP detonate their hideout, causing a massive explosion that also kills seventeen civilians, including four young girls aged four and five.
The Casbah also plays a role in the December 1960 demonstrations, where Algerians march into European neighborhoods, and later in the popular uprisings during Algeria's independence.

Post-independence
After Algeria's independence, the Casbah experiences an exodus, with native families—the beldiya—moving to more spacious European-style apartments in Bab el Oued or El Biar. The Casbah becomes a site of speculation and transience, where properties are rented and sublet. The original inhabitants are gradually replaced by rural migrants.
Restoration plans follow one another without success due to a lack of political will. The Casbah quickly becomes an overcrowded, deteriorating area that never regains its central role in Algiers. However, it remains a powerful symbol of resistance against injustice and a site of collective memory for the Algerian people. UNESCO designates the Casbah as a World Heritage Site in 1992 and continues to contribute to its preservation. Local associations and residents also engage in restoration efforts and social initiatives. The citadel overlooking the site is currently undergoing advanced restoration.

Notable Figures
Djamila Bent Mohamed, an Algerian painter, was born there.
Mohamed Tadjadit, an Algerian poet, grew up there.

Socio-Urban Structure
The urban layout of the Casbah of Algiers is characteristic of Maghrebian Arab-Berber medinas. The later Ottoman influence is mainly seen in military architecture, particularly in the citadel overlooking the city. Originally, the term "Casbah" referred solely to this citadel before it was extended to encompass the entire medina, defined by the fortifications built during the Regency of Algiers in the 16th century. The Casbah of Algiers presents a complex and mysterious urban fabric, particularly intriguing to Orientalist painters. The city's natural topography explains its winding streets, true labyrinths characteristic of the old city, as it occupies a hilly site facing the sea. According to architect Ravéreau, "the site creates the city", while Le Corbusier observes that houses and terraces are oriented toward the sea, a source of both fortune and misfortune (shipwrecks, missing sailors). The old city is fundamentally oriented towards the Mediterranean and turns its back on the hinterland. It is severed from direct sea access during colonization due to the construction of coastal boulevards. The very narrow alleys sometimes lead to dead ends or vaulted passageways known as sabat. Donkeys are among the few animals capable of navigating the entire Casbah, and since the era of the Regency of Algiers, they have been used for garbage collection. Alongside the dense network of traditional alleyways, colonial-era roads like "Rue d'Isly" and "Rue de la Lyre" penetrate the Casbah.
The Casbah has an urban space organization that aligns with the site and its terrain. To this day, it remains oriented toward the "Amirauté," its historic port. Le Corbusier deemed its urban planning perfect, noting the tiered arrangement of houses, which ensures that each terrace has a view of the sea. The spatial organization reflects social life. Certain spaces are considered intimate, such as house terraces, which are primarily reserved for women. The hawma, referring to the neighborhood, is seen as a semi-private space, while commercial centers (souks), fountains, and places of power are regarded as fully public. The Casbah also has, in each district, mosques and kouba (shrines) of local saints, such as those of Sidi Abderrahmane and Sidi Brahim, whose tomb is located in the Amirauté of Algiers.

The Casbah of Algiers is traditionally divided into a "lower Casbah," a large part of which was demolished to make way for colonial-style buildings and the present-day Place des Martyrs, and an "upper Casbah," which is better preserved and includes the citadel and Dar Soltan, the last palace of the Dey. The lower Casbah has traditionally been the hub of trade and power in the old city. It is where the traditional decision-making centers were concentrated, such as the former palace of the Dey, the Djenina—demolished during colonization—Dar Hassan Pacha, which became the winter palace of the governor of Algeria during the colonial period, as well as the Palais des Raïs, which housed the corsairs of the Regency of Algiers. This district was also the focus of modifications by the colonial administration, keen to establish itself in the heart of Algiers and leave its mark on the city. The walls and gates were partially demolished by the French military during the city's redevelopment. However, they remain in popular memory through toponymy. Thus, it is common to navigate Algiers using the names of the city's former gates, such as Bab El Oued (which gives its name to the adjacent neighborhood), Bab Jdid, Bab el Bhar, and Bab Azzoun. Within the Casbah, there are souks, such as those in the Ketchaoua Mosque district and Jamaa el Houd (the former synagogue of Algiers). Some souks have retained their specialties, such as the one on Rue Bab Azzoun, dedicated to traditional clothing (burnous, karakou, etc.), or the one on Rue des Dinandiers. The Algerian souk, which was banned at the beginning of the colonial period, remains the most common means of trade for the population, particularly through the practice of trabendo (informal trade). The streets around the Ketchaoua Mosque are often filled with merchandise, recreating an atmosphere reminiscent of the old city's social and economic interactions. The Casbah also preserves functional hammams, such as "Hammam Bouchlaghem," which dates back to the Ottoman era and is frequented by both the Jewish and Muslim communities of the city. The city's former commercial vocation is reflected in its foundouks, such as the one near Jamaa el Kebir, which still has a courtyard surrounded by stacked arcades, or the one located within the citadel.
Since the time of the Regency of Algiers, the Casbah has always played a leading role in Algeria, offering opportunities to both poor inhabitants and merchants from the countryside. It has attracted many Kabyles, given their region's proximity, as well as, to a lesser extent, peasants from all over Algeria after the country's independence. This rural exodus has led to a relative overpopulation of the Casbah. It remains a gateway to the city of Algiers, serving as a transit point and a refuge for the most destitute. The departure of original families to other neighborhoods, such as Bab El Oued, in search of European-style apartments has led to ongoing social transformations within the Casbah, with a constant renewal of part of its population since independence.
The Casbah is also socially defined by its traditional craftsmanship, which provides a livelihood for many families. Craftsmen used to organize themselves into zenkat (commercial streets), such as the zenkat n'hass (Copper Alley) for coppersmiths. However, due to social changes during colonization and after independence, traditional crafts have significantly declined. Artisans no longer group themselves into guilds or zenkat, and many prefer to abandon their trades, which no longer guarantee sufficient income in a modern society. Nonetheless, local associations, residents, and, to a lesser extent, authorities, are working to preserve these trades and uphold their social role through apprenticeship schools, where young people are trained in artisanal crafts.

The Casbah is a meeting place for two forms of socialization. The first is that of the beldiya (native city dwellers), who can be considered part of a "mythical" socialization process, as they symbolize the city and justify certain social practices through a shared identity. The second form of socialization is that of migrants, who have developed their own cultural expressions. Their contributions to popular culture—through music, cafés, and the concept of bandits d'honneur (honorable outlaws)—reflect their deep-rooted presence in the city. In practice, symbols of this popular culture, often carried by people of rural origin, are frequently used in nostalgic narratives about the Casbah. Hadj El Anka, the famous chaâbi singer born in Bab Jdid (upper Casbah), is often cited as one of the key figures of Casbadji life. The image of a warm, close-knit, and tolerant popular culture continues to shape descriptions of daily life in the Casbah.

Population and demographics
In antiquity, the population of Algiers was relatively small, consisting mainly of Romanized Berbers. During the Zirid period in the 10th century, the city became a small but prosperous settlement, though its population remained limited—small enough to seek refuge on nearby islets in case of attack. The exclusively Berber character of Algiers' population was later modified with the arrival of the Tha‛alaba, a small Arab tribe expelled from Titteri in the 13th century. This led to a gradual process of Arabization, particularly in the religious sphere.
The city's growth in the 16th and 17th centuries was accompanied by demographic expansion. Algiers had about 60,000 inhabitants by the late 14th century and over 150,000 by the 17th century. This demographic shift transformed the city into a melting pot of Mediterranean populations at the expense of its Berber heritage. By this time, Kabyles made up only a tenth of the population, largely due to the Ottoman rulers' distrust of these groups, whose region remained politically independent, structured around the dissident Kingdom of Koukou and the Kingdom of the Beni Abbès.
The rest of the population included Arab families from Algiers, some descended from the Tha‛alaba, as well as Andalusians and Tagarins who arrived from the 14th century onward. In the early 17th century, Algiers welcomed 25,000 Moriscos, who contributed to the city's urban expansion. Other residents came from cities within the Regency, such as Annaba, Constantine, and Tlemcen. These urban dwellers distinguished themselves from the Arabs of the interior, particularly through their dialect, which was difficult for southern nomads and Berbers to understand. Many worked in administration, commerce, or religious affairs. The Turks controlled key positions in the government, military, and navy, while the city also attracted many Christian renegades, who were often recruited as corsairs. Another significant group was the berrani ("outsiders"), rural communities mainly from Saharan cities and oases such as Biskra, Laghouat, and the M'zab region. A Jewish community also lived in Algiers, composed of rural migrants from within Algeria, as well as Jews of Spanish origin who arrived from the 14th century and later from Livorno in the 17th century. Additionally, the city was home to Kouloughlis (offspring of Turkish fathers and local mothers) and freed Black slaves.
With the decline of Barbary piracy in the late 17th century, Algiers' population began to shrink. From 150,000 inhabitants in the 17th century, it fell to 50,000 by the late 18th century and just 25,000 on the eve of the French conquest. After the city was taken by the French in 1830, nearly half of the population emigrated, refusing to live under Christian rule. By 1831, a census recorded only 12,000 residents, a decline explained by the flight of 6,000 Turks and the departure of urban populations to the interior regions of the country.
Algiers' Muslim population did not return to its previous levels until 1901, thanks to a massive influx of Kabyle migrants, leading to a process of "re-Berberization" of the city. By the 20th century, the Casbah had become home to a significant number of families from the Djurdjura region.
After independence, the Casbah underwent another wave of migration. Many urban families moved to former European neighborhoods, while rural migrants replaced them. The Casbah remains one of the most densely populated areas in the world, though its population density has declined since the 1980s as residents move to less crowded districts in Algiers. This residential de-densification has helped ease overcrowding in working-class neighborhoods. However, the collapse of aging buildings has also contributed to population decline. In 2004, the administrative district of the Casbah (which extends slightly beyond the historical site) had 45,076 residents, down from 70,000 in 1998. The historic site itself housed 50,000 inhabitants in 1998, with a density of 1,600 people per hectare, despite its capacity being estimated at only 900 per hectare.

Architecture
The Casbah of Algiers is a quintessential example of traditional Maghrebi cities, found in the western Mediterranean and sub-Saharan Africa. Despite various changes over time, the urban ensemble has largely preserved its integrity. The aesthetic characteristics of Islamic art and the original construction materials remain intact.
The Casbah still retains its citadel, palaces, mosques, wast al-dar (houses with central patios), mausoleums, and hammams, all of which contribute to its unique identity. Its military architecture bears Ottoman influences from the Regency period, while its civil architecture maintains the authenticity of Maghrebi medinas. However, the Casbah is also an evolving space. During the colonial era, some buildings were demolished to make way for European-style residences, particularly along the waterfront and at the city's European periphery. As a result, Haussmann-style buildings from the colonial period now stand at the edges of the Casbah and are considered part of its classified heritage. In addition, modifications to housing structures have introduced non-traditional materials, and traditional building supplies—such as thuya wood—are becoming scarce. The Casbah's social marginalization and the inefficiency of conservation plans have made it a threatened site, despite its UNESCO classification.

Construction techniques
Walls and arches
The walls of the Casbah are built using the commande technique, meaning they are composed of tightly fitted bricks. Some walls feature a mixed structure, using a variety of materials such as rubble and wood. One commonly used method is the construction of double-layered walls, with a rigid brick outer layer and a flexible wooden framework. This design provides earthquake resistance. The vertical structures include brick arcades and columns, with two main types of arches: outrepassé brisé (broken horseshoe arches) and pointed arches. Cedarwood beams are often placed at the base of arch capitals or at the intersection of two arches.

Roofs and floors
The roofing can be masonry or wood-structured. Masonry roofs are often cross-vaulted and can be used for domestic spaces such as entrances, stair landings, or large spaces in major buildings (palaces, mosques...). Wooden structures are often used for floors or terrace roofs; they are composed of logs, over which branches or wooden planks are placed to support a mortar made of earth and lime. This mortar itself serves as a base for ceramic tiles or a lime waterproofing layer for terraces. Metal structures, used as floor supports, are more recent as they date back to the colonial period (19th century). This non-traditional material has aged poorly, and many structural issues are due to its use.

Openings and staircases
Crossings in masonry structures can be made using arcades, which are themselves masonry, or flat bands of wood or marble. In patios, the arches are most often horseshoe arches forming a slight ogive. The staircases in the Casbah are masonry structures with a wooden framework. A sloped platform is poured over wooden logs, on top of which bricks form the steps. Decoration varies, with marble adorning grand residences, while slate is used in modest homes.

Ornaments
Various elements are used to decorate the houses of the Casbah: wooden balustrades, door openings, capitals, and ceramic tiles for floors and walls. The porticos and galleries give the Casbah its distinctive architectural identity. The arrangement of ogival arches is characteristic of its spatial composition. The patio is an example of this arrangement, where the harmony of the arch sequence can mask geometric variations, provided they maintain a consistent height (from the springing of the arch to its keystone). Variations in the width of the arches do not disrupt the overall visual harmony. The Casbah's arches are often of the horseshoe type; their shapes, either pointed or broken, constitute an Algerian architectural specificity.
The characteristic ornamentation includes horizontal friezes and vertical appliqués. These arch ornaments are made of ceramics, and the size of the rings is in harmony with the overall architectural design. Given the considerable demand for tiles, some are imported from Italy, France, and the Netherlands. Finally, capitals, some of which are recovered from the Roman ruins of Icosium, are used to decorate the upper parts of columns. Capitals and abaci reinforce the uniqueness of the Casbah's architecture.

Domestic architecture
The domestic architecture of the Casbah represents a traditional human habitat rooted in Muslim culture and deeply Mediterranean in character. The typology remains relatively stable between palaces and the modest artisan's home. The typical Casbah house is clustered, attached, and presents only one façade. It is believed that this method of grouping dwellings dates back to the Zirid era. The footprint of a house generally ranges between 30 m2 and 60 m2.
It always has a view of the sea thanks to its terrace, and light is generally provided by the patio or, less frequently, by a window facing the street. The entrance door always includes a grille to allow ventilation of the lower floors with cool air from the alleyways. The Algerian house is oriented inward, particularly toward its patio (wast al-dar), which is the heart of the home and contains a well (bir). It serves as a convivial space for families, with up to four sharing a house, and is also the traditional area for receiving visitors. The walls are masonry constructions made of lightly fired earth bricks and a mortar consisting of lime and thick earth. The floors are built with wooden logs, while the foundations use a barrel vault technique. The roof is flat, with a thick layer of earth—up to 70 cm on terraces—and the surface is coated with a mortar made of earth and natural additives, all covered with lime. The wastewater drainage system consists of a genuine network of brick sewers beneath the streets, following the slope of the site, dating back to the Regency of Algiers. The connections are made with interlocking pottery elements. Since colonization, the network has been modernized.

The domestic typology of the Casbah is divided into several subcategories: the alaoui house, the chebk house, the portico house, and the palaces. The alaoui house is the only one without a patio, with air and light coming through windows. Built on a small plot, its ground floor—smaller than the total footprint due to the sloping terrain—may be used for commerce or storage. The upper floor—sometimes two floors—contains a single large room. To maximize space, this type of house incorporates overhangs.
The chebk house is often an annex (douera) of a larger house and is designed to fit minimal space constraints. Its very narrow patio is located upstairs and is paved with marble, while the rooms have terracotta tile flooring. The walls also feature ceramic tiles and lime. The portico house is the quintessential patio house, oriented inward. In the upper floors, it may cede space to neighboring houses and often features a beautiful second-floor room with a kbou (a cantilevered projection over the street aligned with the room). The patio and windows are adorned with ceramic tiles in geometric or floral motifs.

Typology of the medina
Algerian medinas reflect an evolution in urban typology over time. It is established that cities and urban spaces develop from villages into proto-urban and then fully urban typologies throughout history. The transition from a proto-urban nucleus to an urban one is marked morphologically by horizontal and then vertical densification, a classic pattern in the evolution of dwellings over the centuries.
Densification, for a given plot, consists of occupying all available space; then, additional construction modules are stacked to create upper floors. Algiers is a city with variable development, exhibiting the successive stages of this evolution. It reached a significant level of urbanization as early as the medieval period, featuring an advanced typology of buildings reaching up to four stories above the ground floor, with an average of two stories in the Casbah. In contrast, the Casbah of Dellys, as old as that of Algiers, represents a proto-urban typology, where courtyard staircases are not integrated into the layout to form a patio but remain an occasional architectural means of access to upper rooms.
The typology of the medina is dense in a horizontal sense and introverted; the patio houses occupying a central plot can even be adjoining on all four sides (this typology can be found in Algiers, Blida, Miliana, and Dellys). Houses share one, two, or three party walls. The limited space within the housing block, where similar and neighboring houses proliferate, influences the individual typology of each house. The whole forms a continuous built environment characteristic of the Casbah, of the "load-bearing" type.

Palaces and residences
The main current palaces and residences of the Casbah include Dar Aziza, Dar Hassan Pacha, Palais Mustapha Pacha, Palais Ahmed Bey, Palais El Hamra, Dar Khedaoudj el Amia, Dar El Kadi, Dar Soltan, the Maison du Millénaire, the Palais des Raïs, Dar Essadaka, and Dar Es Souf. Additionally, the extra-muros palaces of the Fahs of Algiers and residences incorporated as dependencies of public institutions (hospitals, a high school) are part of this heritage.

The oldest of these palaces is the Jenina, which was ravaged by a fire in 1844. This palace, originally a Berber fort, served as the residence of the local sovereigns of Algiers during the Middle Ages, notably the last one, Salim at-Toumi. It predates the Regency of Algiers, during which it was the seat of power. The people of Algiers called it Dar Soltan el Qedim, and it remained the center of power until 1817. Only part of this complex remains, including Dar Aziza, located on Place des Martyrs, facing the Ketchaoua Mosque. The palace of Dar Aziza is typical of 16th-century Algerian residences. Originally three stories high, it lost its top floor during the 1716 earthquake. It was used as a storage facility in 1830, and in 1832, the staircase leading to the terrace was removed. After some modifications, it became the residence of the archbishop during French colonization. Dar Aziza is rich in wall decorations made of sculpted marble and features a magnificent patio adorned with fountains, woodwork, ceramics, and colored glass screens.
The Palais Mustapha Pacha was built in 1798. One of its unique features is that it contains half a million antique tiles from Algeria, Tunisia, as well as Spain and Italy. The marble of its fountain comes from Italy, and its doors are made of cedar. Today, it houses the Calligraphy Museum of Algiers.
The Palais Hassan Pacha is a Maghrebi-style palace built in 1791. It was modified during the colonial period with neo-Gothic and Orientalist architectural elements.
The Palais Ahmed Bey is located in the Lower Casbah, in the Souk-el-Djemâa district, bordering Hadj Omar Street. It is part of the Jenina palace complex. Built in the 16th century as the dey's residence, it follows the typical architectural style of the period. It now houses the administration of the National Theatre of Algeria.

The Palais des Raïs is one of the last surviving remnants of the medina located by the sea, and it has undergone recent restoration. This palace, once belonging to corsairs, alternates between public and private spaces. It comprises three palatial buildings and six modest dwellings (douerates) decorated with refined elements such as ceramic tiles, wooden balustrades, marble columns, and intricately adorned ceilings. It also includes an old hammam and a menzah (a terrace overlooking the site with a view of the sea). Today, this palace functions as a cultural center.During the Regency of Algiers, many summer palaces were located outside the city walls in the Fahs of Algiers. The Fahs refers to the outskirts and suburbs of the medina and is a distinct space from the main city. It was the site of various summer palaces and residences with gardens. One of the most famous among them is the Bardo Palace, which now houses the Bardo National Museum.

Mosques
Among the principal mosques of the Casbah of Algiers are Jamaa Ketchaoua, Jamaa el Kebir, Jamaa el Jdid, Jamaa Ali Bitchin, Jamaa Sidi Ramdane, Jamaa Sidi M’hamed Cherif, Jamaa el Berrani, Jamaa el Safir, and Jamaa li Houd.
The oldest mosque in the Casbah of Algiers is Jamaa El Kebir, the Great Mosque, built in 1097 by Yusuf Ibn Tashfin in the Almoravid style. It was constructed at a time when Andalusian artistic influence was strong in the Maghreb. The defining features of this mosque are its prayer hall and minaret. The hypostyle prayer hall is centrally arranged, with powerful pillars connected by large, festooned arches—lobed for the nave and simple, polished for the aisles. The mihrab is decorated with columns and ceramics. The minaret, rebuilt by a Zayyanid sultan of Tlemcen in 1324, is quadrangular, topped with a small lantern, and adorned with ceramics and fine carvings. The external gallery is not original; it was built using marble columns from the demolished Es-Sayida Mosque, which was once located on Place des Martyrs and was destroyed during colonization.
Jamaa Sidi Ramdane is one of the medieval mosques of the medina, dating back to the 11th century.
Jamaa Ketchaoua is a unique structure that stands as a testament to the history of the Casbah. Founded in 1436, before the Regency of Algiers, it was built when Berber dynasties ruled the city. Its architecture blends Moorish, Turkish, and Byzantine styles. The mosque was modified during the Regency and especially during French colonization, when it was converted into a cathedral before being returned to Islamic worship upon Algeria's independence. A larger building was constructed around 1613 under the Regency's rule, and it was further renovated in 1794 under Hassan Pacha's administration. Its architecture was inspired by Turkish mosques built in the Byzantine style. From 1844 onward, under French colonization, modifications were made to adapt it for Catholic use, resulting in the removal of its original Maghrebi-style square minaret and the construction of two façade towers and a choir extending from the prayer hall. The church was classified as a historical monument by the French administration in 1908 and returned to Islamic worship after Algeria's independence.
Jamaa al-Jdid is one of the more recent mosques, built in 1660 by Dey Mustapha Pacha in a style reminiscent of the Ottomans. It features domes similar to those found in Istanbul. However, its 27-meter-high minaret is in the Maghrebi style with a distinctive feature: since 1853, it has had a clock taken from the old Jenina Palace, which was demolished during the colonial period. It was designated for the Turks in the city, following the Hanafi rite, and its proximity to the sea earned it the nickname "the Fishermen's Mosque." According to legend, a Christian captive designed its plans, which would explain its Latin cross shape. Its interior is adorned with woodwork, and its minbar is made of Italian marble.

Jamaa el Berrani, literally "the Mosque of Foreigners," was built in 1653 and rebuilt in 1818 by Hussein Dey at the foot of the Algiers citadel to serve as the Agha's tribunal. It was named after the foreigners who came to pray there before their audience with the dey. Later, it was converted into a Catholic place of worship during part of the colonial period.The Casbah also has many small mosques, such as the Ali Bitchin Mosque, built by a Venetian renegade who converted to Islam, whose real name was Picenio. This mosque was constructed in 1622 by the wealthy merchant. It follows the Ottoman architectural style, featuring numerous domes, but also includes a square-shaped Maghrebi minaret. Originally, its prayer hall was unadorned, with walls simply whitewashed. Over time, however, stucco and other interior decorations were added. Currently, the building is undergoing restoration. Other mosques were built near mausoleums, such as the Jamaa Sidi Abderrahmane, erected beside the mausoleum of the same name in 1696. This mosque features domes and a richly decorated minaret.

The Casbah also had mosques that were demolished during the colonial period, leaving a lasting mark on the city's memory. Among them was the Es-Sayida Mosque (Mosque of the Lady), formerly located at Place des Martyrs, which was demolished in 1832. Its colonnades were repurposed to create the peristyle of Jamaa el Kebir, the Great Mosque, in 1836, as an attempt to compensate for the unpopularity of its demolition and colonial modifications.
Other mosques, such as the M'sella Mosque near Bab el Oued (demolished in 1862), Jamaa Mezzomorto (built by Dey Mezzomorto), Jamaa m'ta Sattina Maryam, and "Notre Dame Maryam" (destroyed in 1837), were also lost due to various urban developments. Jamaa li Houd, known as the "Mosque of the Jews," was originally a synagogue built between 1850 and 1865. It was converted into a mosque after the country's independence, following the departure of the local Jewish community.

Madrasas and mausoleums
The Casbah contains several madrasas, the most well-known being the Thaâlibiyya Madrasa. It was built in 1904 under the administration of Governor Charles Jonnart, who promoted the neo-Moorish architectural style, sometimes referred to as "Jonnart style." This style is also seen in several contemporary buildings, such as the Grand Post Office of Algiers and the Oran train station. The madrasa was constructed in honor of the renowned 14th-century Maghrebi theologian Sidi Abderrahmane, considered the patron saint of Algiers. Before colonization, the Casbah had around eighty zawiyas and madrasas, most of which are no longer in use, while some have been converted into mosques, such as the Zawiya of Sidi M'hamed Cherif.
The Casbah is also home to several maraboutic figures, including Sidi Brahim, protector of the sea, whose tomb is located in the admiralty; Sidi M'hamed Chérif, known for his famous fountain; Sidi H'lal, the saint of Bab el Oued; and Sidi Bouguedour, considered the "chief of marabouts". The mausoleums of Sidi H'lal, Sidi Bouguedour, and Sidi Abderrahmane, along with the mosque of Sidi M'hamed Cherif, are currently undergoing restoration.
Thaâlibiyya Madrasa was built near the tomb of Sidi Abderrahmane. The mausoleum surrounding his tomb was erected in the 17th century and even received a visit from Queen Victoria, who, moved by the site's grace, donated crystal chandeliers that still adorn the tomb today. Sidi Abderrahmane is regarded as the patron saint of Algiers, and his richly decorated mausoleum features calligraphic inscriptions of Quranic verses on the walls.

This mausoleum, which includes a mosque with an outdoor cemetery, serves both religious and funerary functions. The cemetery also houses the tomb of Sidi Ouali, a saint from the East, whose legend claims he unleashed the sea against Charles V's ships during the Siege of Algiers in 1541. Other notable figures buried there include saints such as Walî Dada, Sidi Mansour ben Mohamed ben Salîm, and Sidi 'Abd Allah; rulers of the Regency of Algiers, including Ahmed Bey of Constantine and deys Moustapha Pacha and Omar Pacha; as well as renowned personalities like writer Mohamed Bencheneb (1869–1929) and the distinguished miniature painter and illuminator Mohamed Racim (1896–1975).

Citadel and defensive structures
The citadel, which is the true heart of the Casbah, is situated on the heights of the medina, covering an area of 9,000 square meters, of which 7,500 square meters are built-up. Its construction dates back to 1597, on the site of a former Zirid establishment. It became the seat of the dey's power in 1817.
This complex includes:

The dey's palace
A palace designated for the beys of Constantine, Oran, and Médéa, who were vassals of the dey
Two mosques, one for the dey and the other for the Janissaries
A gunpowder factory, used for producing saltpeter and gunpowder
The remains of casemates and a former garden that housed exotic trees, rare plants, and an aviary for rare birds
Bastions and ramparts
An old harem
A summer pavilion
The Agha baths
A summer garden
A winter garden
The ostrich park
During the colonial period, the French fragmented the citadel complex to build a road, now known as Mohamed Taleb Street. As of 2015, the Algiers citadel remains under restoration.However, the citadel was not the city's only defensive structure. Originally, Algiers was surrounded by a wall punctuated by gates: Bab Azoun, Bab el Oued, Bab Jedid, and Bab Jezira. A broader network of forts (borj), built between the 16th and 17th centuries, provided additional defense. These included El Fanar in the port, Moulay Hasan (or Fort l'Empereur) in the hinterland, and Tamentfoust on the opposite side of Algiers Bay. Borj El Fanar still exists, along with the admiralty forts, though many others were demolished during the colonial era. On the waterfront, one of the last remnants of the city's historical structures is the Palais des Raïs. Its imposing seaside facade is still equipped with cannons aimed at the sea. The Casbah was originally enclosed by a defensive wall, of which only ruins remain, such as those opposite Serkadji prison.

Urban decay and social decline
The Casbah faces challenges related to its status as an inhabited heritage site. Since the colonial period, it has been relegated to the background, progressively losing its role as the city's urban center. Demolitions have taken place to make way for new urban planning. During the colonial era, the old city was seen as an outdated, dangerous place—a haven for outcasts and home to a poor population. However, aside from demolitions in the lower Casbah and the construction of peripheral neighborhoods, the urban fabric remained largely intact, as the residents developed a form of communal management of both public and private spaces. This was in resistance to the Haussmannian urban planning model imposed by the colonial authorities.
In the post-independence evolution, the role of the inhabitants has been contradictory. Since 1962, the Casbah has become a zone of relegation and social decline. The maintenance of public spaces has lost its effectiveness due to the dwindling number of zabalines (garbage collectors) and siyakines (sprinklers who cleaned the streets with seawater), leading to an accumulation of waste and rubble. These deteriorations are partly due to the upheaval of the medina's population, as many residents arrived after independence without any "urban experience". The Casbah has also faced the exodus of some of its former inhabitants, the beldiya or "city dwellers". Additionally, the role of the Algerian state must be emphasized, as it has pursued an inadequate urban policy, with no administration establishing itself in the Casbah between 1962 and 1985. Consequently, the medina has continued to lose its urban centrality. After independence, the Casbah also became a refuge for migrants from rural areas, serving as an entry point into the city. It turned into a veritable urban ghetto, a repelling space that, paradoxically, lies at the heart of a city offering no practical centrality. The Casbah's population has thus been composed of the most disadvantaged layers of Algiers' society, while the housing crisis has perpetuated the district's overpopulation. Additionally, a cultural and identity crisis has emerged, with the introduction of concrete into houses and the loss of function of certain architectural features, such as the patio (west dar), which has been bypassed by new room-to-room connections. The patio was traditionally a gathering place for interconnected families. However, as it is now occupied by families who do not know each other and are reluctant to share their privacy with neighbors, these patios have lost part of their original purpose. Paradoxically, preservation plans that focus on palaces and bourgeois houses have allowed the overall urban fabric to deteriorate—terrace continuity has been disrupted, ceramics have disappeared, etc. This reflects a narrow vision of heritage from an administration that perceives the complex urban space as cumbersome. However, restoration efforts are increasingly incorporating the concept of social rehabilitation.
The insecurity and isolation of the neighborhood contribute to social marginalization, which in turn fuels the degradation of the urban environment. About 76% of the properties are privately owned, often as undivided estates (biens habous), complicating the financing of restoration and maintenance efforts. This legal situation hinders state intervention. Action plans are repeatedly implemented using the same methods, leading to repeated failures on the ground. This explains why heritage restoration has remained stalled for decades. Of the 1,200 Moorish-style houses recorded in 1962, only fifty have been restored, approximately 250 have collapsed, and 400 are sealed off and unoccupied—although about 50% have been illegally reoccupied.
The repeated failure of rehabilitation plans is attributed to the lack of a comprehensive vision that includes the perspectives of residents and key local actors, such as associations and the oldest inhabitants of the medina. Since these groups have not been involved in various rehabilitation projects since independence, many efforts have been compromised. Additionally, projects are often assigned to foreign firms that struggle to integrate local architectural knowledge, reflecting what some perceive as a "colonized complex" within Algerian authorities, who appear unable to mobilize local expertise. Meanwhile, community organizations protest what they call a "culture of forgetting", but their concrete actions remain limited.

2018-2019: Rehabilitation project and controversy
In the late 2010s, the Île-de-France region—twinned with the Wilaya of Algiers—provided financial support for a Casbah rehabilitation project led by architect Jean Nouvel. This sparked criticism, with a petition signed by 400 Algerians (mainly from the diaspora) denouncing the fact that he was from the former colonial power. In Le Huffington Post, architect Kamel Louafi sharply responded: "All these signatories who act and work outside their country deny Jean Nouvel this right and ask him to let Algerian colleagues take care of the Casbah, as if intelligence were determined by birth or ethnicity."

Culture
Handicrafts
The handicraft sector in the Casbah is in decline. It has received no effective support policies, and combined with a struggling tourism industry, its current state is at odds with the once-flourishing history of the old city. The remaining master artisans are few, and traditional crafts face tax burdens and rising material costs. For example, brassware (dinanderie) is affected by a shrinking number of artisans, a scarcity of raw materials, and the rising price of copper sheets. Additionally, traditional handcrafted objects are increasingly being displaced by manufactured goods.

During the Regency of Algiers, artisans were under the authority of the caïd el blad (city commissioner), a high-ranking official close to the dey. Specialized districts—or rather, narrow streets (zenkat)—were dedicated to specific trades. Shops and artisan guilds that were still active at the end of the 19th century had largely disappeared by the years leading up to World War I.One of Algiers' most renowned artisanal crafts is brassware, which dates back to the medieval period. Brassworkers (dinandiers) traditionally produce sniwa (richly decorated copper trays with geometric patterns), mibkhara (incense burners), l'brik and tassa (ewer and basin sets), berreds (teapots), and tebssi laâchaouets (conical-lid couscous steamers). The motifs used include stars, geometric shapes, and floral designs such as jasmine. Lucien Golvin viewed Algerian brassware as an Ottoman legacy—or at least as having strong similarities with artistic traditions from former Ottoman territories. Some decorative elements, such as tulips, carnations, cypresses, and scattered flowers, support this connection, as they frequently appear on engraved or incised copper objects.
The Casbah is also an important center for woodworking. The technique used is chiseling, and sometimes painting, to create richly decorated chests, mirrors, and tables. The artistic woodwork of old buildings continues to be restored by local artisans. A particular type of chest (sendouk) made of painted wood is still produced in the Casbah. These objects are called "bridal chests" because they are often used, especially in rural areas, to store wedding trousseaus. They feature two handles on each side and a lock for secure closure. The ornamentation consists of Arab-Andalusian motifs, often floral in nature, occasionally replaced by depictions of animals such as roosters or peacocks.
There is still a traditional garment-making craft in the Casbah, producing outfits such as the karakou, caftan, haïk, and fez. Shops near Jamaa Li Houd are the only ones that still sell "Algiers soap" (saboun D'zair).

The cultural value of these crafts is beginning to attract interest from both residents and the state, which, according to artisans, is still investing timidly in tax exemptions and specialized schools. Some initiatives to create artisanal businesses are revitalizing these trades—for instance, the crafting and restoration of painted wooden objects.

The Casbah in the arts
Cinema
Algiers has been at the heart of a rich filmography, one that few capitals in the world could rival by the 20th century. Around forty feature films and a hundred short films were shot there over the course of the century. Notable examples include Sarati le Terrible (1922), Tarzan, the Ape Man (1932), Pépé le Moko (1937), Casbah (1938), Heart of the Casbah (1952), The Stranger (1968), Z (1969), and The Battle of Algiers by Gillo Pontecorvo (1969). Pépé le Moko is still regarded as a film that glorifies the Casbah, where the setting steals the show from actor Jean Gabin. The Casbah also inspired local productions starting in 1969, including La Bombe (1969), Tahia ya Didou (1971), Omar Gatlato (1976), Autumn: October in Algiers (1988), Bab-el-Oued City (1994), Viva Laldjérie (2004), and Délice Paloma (2007).
The distinction between local and colonial productions lies not in filmmaking techniques or aesthetics but in the portrayal of Algerians. French cinema before independence was often characterized by the absence of native Algerians. In 2012, the film El Gusto explored Algeria's musical heritage and Casbah culture through the reunion of Muslim and Jewish musicians from Algeria.
Les Terrasses (Es-stouh), a Franco-Algerian drama directed by Merzak Allouache, was released in 2013.

Music
Musical troupes
The Casbah of Algiers once had a vibrant daily atmosphere with street performances by various musicians and entertainers. Among them were baba salem troupes, which frequently paraded and animated the streets, especially during celebrations like Mawlid. These groups, widely popular, were mostly composed of Africans from the Sahara, often referred to as gnaoua. The Gnaouas typically wear multicolored Saharan garments, a shell necklace, and play instruments such as the guembri, sound box, karkabou, and tambourine. Nowadays, baba salem troupes have become rare, though they still occasionally perform in Algiers.
Another type of folk troupe is the zornadjia, which performs at festive events. They take their name from the zorna, a kind of oboe, and produce rhythmic music accompanied by the tbilat (a type of drum) and the bendir. These zornadjia troupes are particularly common at weddings.

Arabo-Andalusian music
Chaâbi (meaning "popular") music belongs to the Arabo-Andalusian musical tradition. Over time, it became a symbol of urban popular culture. This genre remains vibrant today, an art form that has endured through generations and evokes the image of a timeless city. Chaâbi relies heavily on secular poetry (qçid), which it revives and adapts to contemporary tastes. The instruments used include the Algerian mandole (a specific instrument invented for chaâbi), the oud (an oriental lute), the banjo, the violin, the tar, and the derbouka.
This musical style emerged in the early 20th century among the working-class communities of the Casbah, many of whom were of Kabyle origin from the countryside. As a result, chaâbi is heavily influenced by Berber accents and exists in the Kabyle language in addition to its Algerian Arabic repertoire. The founding masters of this art include Cheikh Nador, Hadj El Anka, and Cheikh El Hasnaoui. Algerian chaâbi gained international recognition through the famous song Ya Rayah by Dahmane El Harrachi, which has been translated and performed worldwide. The recurring themes in chaâbi include cultural heritage, ancestral laments, homesickness, and traditional festive and religious songs. This music is often played at evening gatherings in courtyards, especially during Ramadan. Hadj El Anka established the first chaâbi music class at the Algiers Conservatory in 1957.
Chaâbi is also a musical genre shared by both Muslim and Jewish inhabitants of the Casbah. Among the most renowned Judeo-Arabic singers is Lili Boniche. His song Ana el Warka was used as the theme for the French TV show Des mots de minuit on France 2. Initiatives such as the El Gusto orchestra aim to reunite and popularize the Casbah's cultural heritage on international stages.

Painting
The Casbah of Algiers has inspired various Algerian and foreign painters, particularly within the Orientalist movement. As early as the 19th century, it served as a source of inspiration for artists such as Eugène Delacroix, who sought to immerse themselves in the atmosphere of the Arab city. One of the most famous painters of the Casbah was Mohammed Racim, a native of the district. His works depict the old Casbah, reviving Algerian folk traditions. Many of his paintings are now housed in the National Museum of Fine Arts of Algiers. The American painter Louis Comfort Tiffany also went through an Orientalist period and visited Algiers in 1875. Between 1957 and 1962, the painter René Sintès created a series of works capturing the Casbah. His paintings, particularly Petit Matin, La Marine, and Couvre-feu, reflect the turbulent atmosphere of Algiers during the Algerian War.

Cultural institutions
Since the 19th century, the Casbah has been home to cultural institutions such as the "National Library and Antiquities of Algiers," founded in 1863, which houses 30,000 volumes and 2,000 Arabic, Turkish, and Persian manuscripts. The Dar Khdaoudj el Amia Palace also serves as a cultural institution. It was the first town hall of Algiers between 1833 and 1839 before being repurposed by the General Government of Algeria as a "technical craft service" with a permanent exhibition of folk arts. In 1961, it became the "Museum of Arts and Popular Traditions" and was later renamed the "National Museum of Arts and Popular Traditions" in 1987. In 1969, Algiers hosted the first Pan-African Festival, during which the Casbah welcomed various artists from the African continent and its diaspora, as well as revolutionary movements such as the Black Panthers. The festival was reintroduced in 2009, a year when the Casbah's heritage was also highlighted.
After its restoration in 1994, the Palais des Raïs became the "Center for Arts and Culture," hosting temporary exhibitions, museum displays, and performances on its terrace, which features a row of cannons facing the sea.
The Casbah also hosts workshops and visits as part of the "International Cultural Festival for the Promotion of Earthen Architecture," organized by the Algerian Ministry of Culture. In 2007, when Algiers was designated the "Capital of Arab Culture," the occasion spurred discussions about heritage preservation and restoration. This event led to the inauguration of the "Algerian Museum of Miniature and Illumination," housed in the Dar Mustapha Pacha Palace. Dar Aziza, a palace in the lower Casbah that was once part of the old Djenina Palace complex, initially housed the "National Archaeology Agency" and now serves as the headquarters of the "Office for the Management and Exploitation of Protected Cultural Assets."

Written heritage
Algiers possesses a significant written historical heritage. In the 19th century, the city had several collections housed in mosques, religious schools (zaouïas), and private collections. Much of this literary heritage suffered the same fate as many buildings, undergoing transformations and demolitions during the colonial period. This era also saw initiatives to preserve and catalog these works. Adrien Berbrugger established a collection housed in the Algiers Library, founded in 1836. The manuscripts originate from both local and foreign sources (Egypt, Andalusia, Morocco, Turkey) and cover cultural and scientific subjects. By 1872, 866 volumes had been cataloged in various libraries, including those of the Great Mosque (Jamaa el Kebir), Jamaa al-Jdid, and the mosques of Sidi Ramdane and Sidi Abderrahmane. At that time, Jamaa al-Jdid alone housed 555 volumes, acquired mainly through donations from the deys of Algiers. The 1872 inventory revealed that Jamaa el Kebir had lost two-thirds of its 1830 collection. Further inventories were conducted in 1907 and 1911. In 1909, Mohamed Bencheneb published the "Catalogue of the Great Mosque of Algiers." This collection includes religious texts, Quranic manuscripts, hadith compilations, biographies of the Prophet, Maliki and Hanafi legal treatises, theology, ethics, and grammar.
Another type of written heritage is the Tachrifat of the Regency of Algiers, also known as the "Register of Noble Affairs." This document is an administrative compilation of records from the Regency. In 1830, registers found in the dey's palace and among high-ranking administrators were transferred to the Arab archives of the colonial administration. These records contain information on tax collection, the management of beylik (state-owned) properties, and religious endowments. They also include scattered historical accounts, regulations, notes on administration, Christian slaves, and tributes paid to the Regency by foreign nations. The Tachrifat is one such collection of archives, translated at the beginning of the colonial period. These documents, which belong to the pre-colonial administration, now form the "Archives of the Former Regency of Algiers," housed in the Algerian national archives outside the Casbah. The National Library of Algeria, which preserves ancient collections, was originally located in historic palaces before moving in 1954 to a new site outside the Casbah. Today, its collections are kept in a modern facility near the Hamma Garden.

Water in culture
The role of water in the Casbah must be understood in its historical context. Water distribution in the city intersects with architecture, engineering and local customs. The concept of aquosity—a quality of life related to water—is a defining feature of many Mediterranean cities. Beyond shaping the city's unique urban identity, water is deeply embedded in intangible heritage, including legends and folklore.
In the 17th century, Algiers boasted an advanced hydraulic infrastructure that sustained a population of approximately 100,000 people, making it a major Mediterranean capital. One of the first elements of this heritage was the "sacred springs." The "Fountain of the Spirits" (Seb’aa Aïoun, meaning "Seven Springs") was a freshwater source that has since disappeared due to the construction of the waterfront. Because these freshwater springs emerged directly from the sea, they were associated with mystical beliefs. The djinn (spirit) of this fountain, Seb’aa Aïoun, was known among Sub-Saharan Africans as Baba Mûsa, also called Al-Bahari ("the freshwater spirit from the Niger"). The Aïn Sidi ‘Ali az-Zwawi spring was named after the saint Ali az-Zwawi, who died in 1576, and was mentioned by Diego de Haëdo. The water, believed to have numerous healing properties, originally flowed through his mausoleum, which stood outside Bab Azoun Gate but has since been destroyed. However, the spring still flows today inside a shop on Patrice Lumumba Street. Among the most famous fountains are those associated with marabouts (Muslim saints), giving them a mystical significance—such as the fountains of Sidi Abdelkader, Sidi Ali Ezzaoui, Mhamed Cherif, Mzaouqa, and Sidi Ramdane. Others, like Aïn Bir Chebana, are also well known. The fountain of Mhamed Cherif, in particular, is said to have the power to calm anxieties and worries if one drinks three sips of its water.
Water fountains were also considered acts of public generosity and were thus referred to in Algiers' toponymy by the Arabic term sabil or, more commonly in the plural form, sebala. This term literally means "charitable and selfless act". According to Kameche-Ouzidane, the word originates from the Quran, where it means "way, path, or road", and is the root of the expression fi sabil Allah, which conveys the idea of a selfless and generous action. Over time, the term came to designate public drinking fountains and water basins established through individual generosity. Such donations ensured that the donor's name would be remembered and contributed to their spiritual salvation in what was considered a "perishable world". Many inscriptions on fountains highlight the importance of water and their role as a public utility. This utility was even more significant because, originally, fountains and natural springs were the primary sources of water, and they could never be privately owned. Donors, as well as palace residents, were strictly forbidden from building such fountains within their private residences. Another form of water supply came from numerous wells—around 2,000 wells were recorded for 3,000 households at the beginning of the colonial era—as well as rainwater cisterns located in underground chambers, which collected water from rooftop terraces.
The fountain known as the "Cale aux Vins," now embedded in a wall of the Museum of Antiquities in Algiers, bears an inscription from 1235 that eloquently highlights the public utility of water and the benevolence of Hussein Pasha. This is evident in Gabriel Colin's translation:

It is through water that all life exists! The governor, Sultan of Algiers, Hussein Pasha, whose pious intentions always aim for good deeds and who, never straying from kindness, brings water everywhere, has made this water flow and built this fountain. By irrigating this place, he has quenched the thirst of those in need. Drink freely of this fresh water in honor of Hussein.
However, out of the 150 fountains that were once operational in the medina, only about ten remain functional today. Referred to by the Arabic words aïn (fountain) or bir (well), they reflect a certain appreciation for public spaces and city life. For example, the "Widows' Fountain" (Aïn al-Ahjajel) was reputed to have the power to bring husbands to widows. These fountains are an integral part of the medina and, although many have dried up, they persist as sites of memory, especially through their names and their role in the old city's toponymy.

Oral tradition
Oral culture plays a significant role in Algiers' traditions, particularly through the practice of boqala. The boqala, in its classic form, is a short poem of four or five verses, either recited or sometimes improvised. Passed down through oral tradition or small written collections, these short poems constitute a centuries-old heritage. This poetry game oscillates between entertainment and divination. In the latter case, it is sometimes accompanied by a magical-religious ritual and is not exclusive to Algiers but is common in other coastal Algerian cities and their hinterlands, such as Blida, Béjaïa, Médéa, Miliana, and Cherchell. The content of a boqala is often a riddle, a mysterious text, or a wise saying, making it open to interpretation. These sessions are traditionally organized by women, although men can also participate. Gatherings typically take place around a well-prepared table, on house terraces, or in patios. They are usually held at night, on the eve of important days or certain days of the week—Wednesdays, Fridays, and Sundays. Such sessions are particularly common during the month of Ramadan. The word boqala comes from the Arabic term for an earthenware jug used to hold water, which is placed over a brazier and around which various rituals may take place.
The sessions begin with an invocation: "Fâl ya fâlfal djibli khbâr man koul blad" (O omen, bring me news from all lands). The language used in these boqala games is Algerian Arabic, incorporating borrowings from languages with which it has been in contact (Berber, Turkish, Spanish, and French), as it is primarily an urban tradition. While the origins of this practice remain unknown, boqala follows a literary structure similar to written poetry and is characterized by stylistic purity, rhythm, and sound patterns that contribute to its popularity. It bears similarities to ancient Andalusian poetry, hawzi music, and traditional songs from Tlemcen. This literary genre remains widespread today due to its thematic diversity, which allows it to engage various audiences and adapt to different circumstances. Moreover, it captivates listeners' imagination, fulfilling a certain desire for escapism.

Current condition
The ANSS, the conservation agency of the Algerian government, reported that 373 buildings in the Casbah have collapsed. Of the 1816 buildings that remain, 40% are ruined or in a critical state, and 10% are boarded up.
Reuters reported in August 2008 that the Casbah was in a state of neglect and certain areas were at risk of collapse.
Algerian authorities list age, neglect and overpopulation as the principal contributors to the degeneration. Overpopulation makes the problem especially difficult to solve because of the effort it would take to relocate the residents. Estimates range from 40,000 to 70,000 people, although it is difficult to be certain due to the number of squatters in vacant buildings. One reason that the government wants to improve the condition of the Casbah is that it is a potential hideout for criminals and terrorists. In the late 1950s and during the civil insurrection and struggle against French colonial rule it was the hideout for the National Liberation Army (Algeria).
Preservationist Belkacem Babaci described the situation as difficult, but not insurmountable, saying: "I still believe it's possible to save it, but you need to empty it and you need to find qualified people who will respect the style, the materials. It's a huge challenge." Restoration projects have been plagued by delays and endemic corruption.

Climate change
Since the Casbah of Algiers is a coastal landmark, it is vulnerable to sea level rise. In 2022, the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report included it in the list of African cultural sites which would be threatened by flooding and coastal erosion by the end of the century, but only if climate change followed RCP 8.5, which is the scenario of high and continually increasing greenhouse gas emissions associated with a warming of over 4 °C., and is no longer considered very likely. The other, more plausible scenarios result in lower warming levels and consequently lower sea level rise: yet sea level rise would continue for about 10,000 years in all of them. Even if the warming is limited to 1.5 °C, global sea level rise is still expected to exceed 2–3 m (7–10 ft) after 2000 years (and higher warming levels will see larger increases by then), consequently exceeding 2100 levels of sea level rise under RCP 8.5 (~0.75 m (2 ft) with a range of 0.5–1 m (2–3 ft)) well before the year 4000. Thus, it is a matter of time before the Casbah of Algiers is threatened by water levels, unless it can be protected by adaptation efforts such as sea walls.

In popular culture
The Casbah of Algiers plays a central role in the 1937 French film Pépé le Moko and the 1938 American film Algiers, in which the noted jewel thief Pepe le Moko, played by Jean Gabin in the French version and Charles Boyer in the American version, hides there after a heist in France, and he becomes a local leader, but as time passes, he begins to feel trapped in the district. Although in the American film, Boyer never said to costar Hedy Lamarr "Come with me to ze Casbah", this line was in the Hollywood movie trailer, and it would stick with him, thanks to generations of impressionists and Looney Tunes parodies.
Boyer's role as Pepe Le Moko was already world-famous when animator Chuck Jones based the character of Pepé Le Pew, the romantic skunk introduced in 1945's Warner Bros. cartoon Odor-able Kitty, on Boyer, his voice – imitated by Mel Blanc – and the catch phrase "Come with me to ze Casbah" from his most well-known performance.
The Casbah of Algiers plays a central role in the 1966 Italian-Algerian war film The Battle of Algiers, co-written and directed by Gillo Pontecorvo.

Notable people
Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi (1384-1479)
Abdelhalim Bensmaia (1866-1933)
Mohamed Charef (1908-2011)
Brahim Boushaki (1912-1997)
Abderrahmane Taleb (1930-1958)
Djamila Bouhired (born 1935)
Djamila Boupacha (born 1938)
Mustapha Toumi (1937-2013)

See also
Kasbah
Medina quarter

Geography
Algiers
Mitidja

History
Zirid dynasty
Regency of Algiers

Algerian War
Battle of Algiers (1956–1957)
Serkadji Prison
Saadi Yacef
Ali La Pointe
Hassiba Ben Bouali
Little Omar

Cinema
Pépé le Moko by Julien Duvivier (1937)
Algiers by John Cromwell (1938)
Casbah by John Berry (1948)
Heart of the Casbah by Pierre Cardinal (1952)
The Battle of Algiers by Gillo Pontecorvo (1965)

Notes
References
Bibliography
Works
History
Montagnon, Pierre (1997). La conquête de l'Algérie : 1830-1871 [The conquest of Algeria: 1830-1871]. Blanche et rouge (in French). Paris: Pygmalion. ISBN 978-2-85704-204-4.
Assari, Nadir (2007). Alger : des origines à la régence turque [Algiers: from its origins to the Turkish Regency] (in French). Algiers: Alpha. ISBN 978-9961-7-8015-2.
Montagnon, Pierre (2012). Histoire de l'Algérie : Des origines à nos jours [History of Algeria: From its origins to the present day] (in French). Paris: Flammarion. ISBN 978-2-85704-204-4.
El Bekri, Abou Obeïd (1965). Abou Obeïd El Bekri, Description de l'Afrique septentrionale : traduit de l'arabe par William Mac Guckin de Slane [Abu Obeid El Bekri, Description of Northern Africa: translated from the Arabic by William Mac Guckin de Slane] (in French). Paris: Librairie d'Amérique et d'Orient, Jean Maisonneuve.
Lagardère, Vincent (1989). Les Almoravides jusqu'au règne de Yūsuf B. Tāšfīn (1039-1106) [The Almoravids until the reign of Yūsuf B. Tāšfīn (1039-1106)]. Histoire et perspectives méditerranéennes (in French). Paris: L'Harmattan.
Koulakssis, Ahmed; Meynier, Gilbert (1987). L'émir Khaled : premier zaʼîm ? : identité algérienne et colonialisme français [Emir Khaled: first za'îm? Algerian identity and French colonialism]. Histoire et perspectives méditerranéennes (in French). Paris: L'Harmattan. ISBN 2-85802-859-1.
Merouche, Lemnouar (2007). Recherches sur l'Algérie à l'époque ottomane [Research on Algeria in the Ottoman era] (in French). Paris: Bouchene. ISBN 978-2-912946-95-9.
Meynier, Gilbert (2010). L'Algérie, cœur du Maghreb antique : de l'ouverture islamo-arabe au repli (698-1518) [Algeria, the heart of the ancient Maghreb: from Islamic-Arab openness to withdrawal (698-1518)] (in French). Paris: La Découverte. ISBN 978-2-7071-5231-2.
Bouchène, Abderrahmane; Peyroulou, Jean-Pierre; Siari Tengour, Ouanassa; Thénault, Sylvie (2012). Histoire de l'Algérie à la période coloniale, 1830-1962 [History of Algeria during the colonial period, 1830-1962] (in French). Paris: La Découverte. ISBN 978-2-7071-8231-9.
Ould Cadi Montebourg, Leïla (2006). Alger, une cité turque au temps de l'esclavage : À travers le Journal d'Alger du père Ximénez, 1718-1720 [Algiers, a Turkish city in the time of slavery: Through the Journal d'Alger of Father Ximénez, 1718-1720] (in French). Montpellier: Presses universitaires de la Méditerranée. ISBN 978-2-36781-083-6.
Belvaude, Catherine (1991). L'Algérie [Algeria] (in French). Montpellier: Karthala. ISBN 978-2-86537-288-1.
Delmas, Jean (2007). La bataille d'Alger [The Battle of Algiers] (in French). Larousse. ISBN 978-2-03-585477-3.
Missoum, Sakina (2003). Alger à l'époque ottomane : la médina et la maison traditionnelle [Algiers in the Ottoman period: the medina and the traditional house] (in French). Edisud. ISBN 978-2-7449-0307-6.
Leschi, Louis (1941). Comptes rendus des séances de l'année [Minutes of the year's sessions] (in French). Éditions Klincksieck.

Urbanism and cultural heritage
Devoulx, Albert (2012). Tachrifat : recueil de notes historiques sur l'administration de l'ancienne régence d'Alger [Tachrifat: collection of historical notes on the administration of the former regency of Algiers] (in French). Hachette. ISBN 978-2-01-262742-0.
Oulebsir, Nabila (2004). Les usages du patrimoine : monuments, musées et politique coloniale en Algérie, 1830-1930 [The uses of heritage: monuments, museums and colonial policy in Algeria, 1830-1930] (in French). Paris: Les éditions de la MSH. ISBN 2-7351-1006-0.
Cohen, Jean-Louis; Oulebsir, Nabila; Kanoun, Youcef; Delaunay, Dominique (2003). Alger : paysage urbain et architectures, 1800-2000 [Algiers: urban landscape and architecture, 1800-2000] (in French). Besançon: Les éditions de l'imprimeur. ISBN 2-910735-83-4.
Almi, Saïd (2002). Urbanisme et colonisation : présence française en Algérie [Town planning and colonization: French presence in Algeria] (in French). Sprimont (Belgium): Éditions Mardaga. ISBN 2-87009-812-X.
Quenza, Bougherira-Hadji (2007). "Typologies modernes versus typologies traditionnelles dans les médinas algériennes" [Modern typologies versus traditional typologies in Algerian medinas]. Architecture Traditionnelle Méditerranéenne [Traditional Mediterranean Architecture] (PDF) (in French). Barcelona: Collegi d'Aparelladors i Arquitectes Tècnics de Barcelona pour Rehabimed. p. 110. ISBN 978-84-87104-74-9.
Atkinson, Adrian (2008). Stratégies pour un développement durable local : renouvellement urbain et processus de transformations informelles [Strategies for local sustainable development: urban renewal and informal transformation processes] (in French). Berlin: Univerlagtuberlin. ISBN 978-3-7983-2086-4.
Dris, Nassima (2005). "Habiter le patrimoine : monde en marge et identité urbaine : La Casbah d'Alger ou le refuge des exclus" [Inhabiting heritage: marginalized communities and urban identity: the Casbah of Algiers, a refuge for outcasts]. Habiter le patrimoine : Enjeux, approches, vécu [Inhabiting heritage: Issues, approaches, experiences] (in French). Rennes: Presses universitaires de Rennes. ISBN 9782753526754.
Bencheneb, Mohamed (1909). Catalogue des Manuscrits arabes de la Grande Mosquée d'Alger [Catalogue des Manuscrits arabes de la Grande Mosquée d'Alger] (in French). Algiers: Jourdan.

Art
Vidal-Bué, Marion (2003). L'Algérie des peintres : 1830-1960 [The Algeria of the painters: 1830-1960] (in French). Algiers/Paris: Paris-Méditerranée. ISBN 2-84272-143-8.
Rahmani, Farida; Bouchenaki, Mounir (2003). La Casbah d'Alger : un art de vivre des Algériennes [The Casbah of Algiers: an Algerian way of life] (in French). Algiers/Paris: Paris-Méditerranée. ISBN 2-84272-174-8.
Samrakandi, Mohammed; Tibouchi, Hamid (2003). Conte, conteurs et néo-conteurs : usages et pratiques du conte et de l'oralité entre les deux rives de la Méditerranée [Storytelling, storytellers and neo-storytellers: uses and practices of storytelling and orality between the two shores of the Mediterranean] (in French). Paris: Presses Universitaires du Mirail. ISBN 2-85816-692-7.
Eudel, Paul (2015). L'orfèvrerie algérienne et tunisienne : Essai d'Art [Algerian and Tunisian gold and silversmithing: Art Essay] (in French). Paris: Primento. ISBN 978-2-335-05040-0.
Tchebwa, Manda (2012). L'Afrique en musiques [Africa in music] (in French). Montpellier: L'Harmattan. ISBN 978-2-296-96409-9.
National publishing and advertising agency (1997). L'artisanat algérien [Algerian handicrafts] (in French). Algiers: Anep.
MʼHamsadji, Kaddour (1989). Jeu de la boûqâla : contribution à une meilleure connaissance de ce divertissement éducatif et populaire [Boûqâla game: contribution to a better understanding of this educational and popular pastime] (in French). Algiers: Office des publications universitaires. ISBN 978-9961-0-0578-1.

Generalist
Ravéreau, André (2007). Casbah d'Alger, et le site créa la ville [Kasbah of Algiers, and the site created the city]. La Bibliothèque arabe (in French). Paris: Actes Sud. ISBN 978-2-7427-6513-3.
Lebane, Amine (2009). Guide de la Casbah d'El-Djazaïr [Guide to the Kasbah of El-Djazaïr] (in French). Algiers: Éditions Guidmania.
Guemriche, Salah (2012). Alger la Blanche : biographies d'une ville [Alger la Blanche: biographies of a city] (in French). Paris: EDI8. ISBN 978-2-262-04039-0.
Cheurfi, Achour (2006). Dictionnaire Encyclopédique de l'Algérie [Encyclopedic Dictionary of Algeria] (in French). Algiers: ANEP. ISBN 978-9947-2-1319-3.
Esquer, Gabriel (1957). Alger et sa région [Algiers and the surrounding region] (in French). Paris: Arthaud.
Vircondelet, Alain (2014). Alger, ombres et lumières : Une biographie [Algiers, Lights and Shadows: A Biography] (in French). Paris: Flammarion. ISBN 978-2-08-133834-0.
Dris, Nassima (2002). La ville mouvementée. Espace public, centralité, mémoire urbaine à Alger [The eventful city. Public space, centrality, urban memory in Algiers] (in French). Algiers: Anep. ISBN 978-2-7475-1812-3.
MʼHamsadji, Kaddour (2007). Casbah d'Alger, autrefois [The Casbah of Algiers, in the past] (in French). Vol. 1: Histoire. De l'île aux Mouettes à la Casbah. Office des publications universitaires. ISBN 978-9961-0-1057-0.
Gedovius, Alain (2018). La Casbah d'Alger 1960, L'esprit d'une ville [The Casbah of Algiers 1960, The Spirit of a City] (in French). Paris: Editions Imanta. ISBN 9782956288206.

Newspapers
History
Camps, Gabriel; Leglay, Marcel; Golvin, Lucien; Mantran, Robert; Boyer, Pierre (2012). "Alger" [Algiers]. Encyclopédie berbère (in French). 4: 447–472. doi:10.4000/encyclopedieberbere.2434. ISSN 2262-7197. Archived from the original on February 19, 2016.
Chergui, Samia (2009). "Les morisques et l'effort de construction d'Alger aux xviie et xviiie siècles" [The Moriscos and the construction of Algiers in the 17th and 18th centuries]. Cahiers de la Méditerranée (in French) (79): 447–472. doi:10.4000/cdlm.4932. Archived from the original on June 17, 2021.
Grangaud, Isabelle (2008). "À propos des archives de l'Algérie ottomane : notes sur le rapport entre conditions de production et nature et usages des sources historiques" [About the archives of Ottoman Algeria: notes on the relationship between production conditions and the nature and uses of historical sources]. Ateliers du LESC (in French). 32. doi:10.4000/ateliers.3222. ISSN 1245-1436. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021.
Lalmi, Nedjma Abdelfettah (2004). "Du mythe de l'isolat kabyle" [The myth of the isolated Kabyle]. Cahiers d'études africaines (in French). 44 (175): 507–531. doi:10.4000/etudesafricaines.4710. Archived from the original on June 9, 2011.
Hoexter, Miriam (1983). "Taxation des corporations professionnelles d'Alger à l'époque turque" [Taxation of professional corporations in Algiers during the Turkish period]. Revue de l'Occident musulman et de la Méditerranée (in French). 36 (36): 19–39. ISSN 2105-2271. Archived from the original on March 21, 2024.
Mari, Jean-Paul (1992). "Algérie : la Casbah des désespérés" [Algeria: the Casbah of the desperate] (PDF). Extrait du Grands Reporters (in French): 1–4. ISSN 2105-2271. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2016.

Urbanism and cultural heritage
Lakjaa, Abdelkader (1998). "Lesbet, Djafar.- La Casbah d'Alger : gestion urbaine et vide social" [Lesbet, Djafar.- The Casbah of Algiers: urban management and social vacuum]. Insaniyat (in French). 5 (5): 134–138. doi:10.4000/insaniyat.11890. ISSN 2335-1578. Archived from the original on November 13, 2014.
Bekkouche, Ammara (2011). "Alger dans tous ses éclats" [Algiers in all its glory]. Jeune Afrique (in French). 5 (2622): 134. ISSN 1950-1285.
Abdessemed-Foufa, Amina (2011). "Le manuel de réhabilitation comme outil de conservation dans le cadre du plan permanent de sauvegarde de la Casbah d'Alger" [The rehabilitation manual as a conservation tool within the framework of the permanent plan for the safeguarding of the Casbah of Algiers] (PDF). RehabiMed (in French). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2016.
Kameche-Ouzidane, Dalila (2014). "Alger et ses espaces publics. Quelle place pour l'eau dans l'ambiance de la Casbah et la ville ?" [Algiers and its public spaces. What role does water play in the atmosphere of the Casbah and the city?]. L'ambiance comme enjeu de l'espace public méditerranéen contemporain (Conférence internationale de Tunis, 24-25-26 février 2014) [Atmosphere as a challenge for contemporary Mediterranean public spaces (International Conference in Tunis, February 24-25-26, 2014)] (in French). Archived from the original on March 4, 2016.
Kameche-Ouzidane, Dalila (2013). Les aqueducs à souterazi de la Régence d'Alger [The underground aqueducts of the Regency of Algiers] (in French).
Kassab, Tsouria (2010). "Réécriture des espaces, entre discours idéologiques et pratiques : La Casbah d'Alger" [Re-writing of spaces, between ideological discourse and practices: The Casbah of Algiers]. Colloque international, dans le cadre des États généraux du Vieux-Québec, organisé par l'Institut du Nouveau Monde (Montréal, Canada) à l'initiative du Comité des citoyens du Vieux-Québec [International symposium, as part of the États généraux du Vieux-Québec, organized by the Institut du Nouveau Monde (Montreal, Canada) on the initiative of the Comité des citoyens du Vieux-Québec] (PDF) (in French). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2016.
Safar-Zitoun, Madani (2001). "Alger ou la recomposition d'une métropole" [Algiers or the reconstruction of a metropolis]. La pensée de midi (in French). 1 (4): 30–35. doi:10.3917/lpm.004.0030. ISSN 1621-5338. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016.
Safar-Zitoun, Madani (2009). "Alger d'aujourd'hui : une ville à la recherche de ses marques sociales" [Algiers today: a city searching for its social bearings]. Insaniyat (in French) (44–45): 44–45. doi:10.4000/insaniyat.385. ISSN 2335-1578. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016.
Sekfali, Zineddine (2007). "Histoire et architecture à Alger — Que peut-on encore sauver ?" [History and architecture in Algiers — What can still be saved?]. Revue Tourisme Magazine (in French).
Baghli, Sid Ahmed (2006). "La préservation du patrimoine : l'exemple du palais du dey d'El Djazaïr" [Preserving heritage: the example of the palace of the Dey of El Djazaïr]. Comptes rendus des séances de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres (in French). 150 (1): 552–562. doi:10.3406/crai.2006.86970. ISSN 1969-6663. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022.
Jaouhari, Mustapha (2009). "Abdelhamid Arab : Manuscrits et bibliothèques musulmanes en Algérie" [Abdelhamid Arab: Manuscripts and Muslim libraries in Algeria]. IFAO 2011 Bulletin critique des Annales islamologiques (in French). Archived from the original on June 17, 2022.
Souq, François; Stiti, Kemal (2011). "Fouilles récentes à Alger" [Recent excavations in Algiers]. Les nouvelles de l'archéologie (in French) (124): 44–48. doi:10.4000/nda.1432. ISSN 0242-7702. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020.

Art
Balta, Paul (2008). "Alger, capitale de la culture arabe 2007" [Algiers, capital of Arab culture 2007]. Confluences Méditerranée (in French). 2 (65): 195–198. doi:10.3917/come.065.0195. ISSN 1148-2664. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015.
Golvin, Lucien (1985). "Le legs des Ottomans dans le domaine artistique en Afrique du Nord" [The Ottoman legacy in the arts in North Africa]. Revue de l'Occident musulman et de la Méditerranée (in French). 39: 201–226. ISSN 2105-2271. Archived from the original on July 23, 2023.
Gast, M (1994). "Coffre" [Chest]. Encyclopédie berbère (in French). 13 : Chèvre – Columnatien (13): 2035–2042. doi:10.4000/encyclopedieberbere.2304. ISSN 2262-7197. Archived from the original on March 23, 2017.
Dridi, Daïkha (2001). "La petite musique du voyage au bout de la nuit" [The music of a journey through the night]. La pensée de midi (in French). 1 (1): 65–71. doi:10.3917/lpm.004.0065. ISSN 1621-5338.
Bensignor, François (2012). "Algérie andalouse : Lili Boniche et El Gusto" [Algerian Andalusian: Lili Boniche and El Gusto]. Hommes et Migrations (in French). 1 (1): 65–71. ISSN 2262-3353. Archived from the original on October 15, 2023.

Generalist
Bekkouche, Ammara (1998). "Ravereau, André. - La Casbah d'Alger, et le site créa la ville. - Préface de Mostéfa Lacheraf" [Ravereau, André. - The Casbah of Algiers, and the site that created the city. - Preface by Mostéfa Lacheraf]. Insaniyat (in French). 5: 134. ISSN 2335-1578. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018.
Makhloufi, Lilia (2012). "Les ambiances dans les vieilles villes algériennes : entre cultures, identités et héritages sensoriels" [The atmospheres in the old Algerian cities: between cultures, identities and sensory heritages]. Ambiances in Action / Ambiances en Acte(s) - International Congress on Ambiances, Montreal 2012 (in French): 487–492. ISSN 1969-6663. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023.
Giovanetti, Francesco (1992). "De la Casbah d'Alger" [From the Casbah of Algiers] (PDF). Environmental Design: Journal of the Islamic Environmental Design Research Centre 1-2 (in French): 66–79. ISSN 0393-5183. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2016.

External links

Dans les murs de la Casbah [Within the walls of the Kasbah] (Video) (in French). France 24. Archived from the original on September 30, 2016.
La Casbah d'Alger [INA] (Video) (in French). France 24. November 1, 1958. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011.
"Casbah d'Alger" [Kasbah of Algiers]. UNESCO (in French). Archived from the original on October 7, 2011.
Découverte d'un dépôt d'armes à Alger [Discovery of an arms depot in Algiers] (Video) (in French). INA. Archived from the original on May 20, 2011.
Arrestation Yacef Saadi - voyage Max Lejeune dans le département des oasis [Arrest of Yacef Saadi - Max Lejeune's trip to the oasis department] (Video) (in French). INA. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014.
La casbah d'Alger [The Kasbah of Algiers] (Video) (in French). INA. Archived from the original on April 26, 2015.
"Journal officiel de la République Algérienne du 19 décembre 1984, page 1512" [Official Journal of the Algerian Republic of December 19, 1984, page 1512] (PDF) (in French). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2016.



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: TIMGAD
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: ancient_city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 17:59:22
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,210
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timgad
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Timgad (Arabic: تيمقاد, romanized: Tīmqād, known as Marciana Traiana Thamugadi) was a Roman city in the Aurès Mountains of Algeria. It was founded by the Roman Emperor Trajan around 100 AD. The full name of the city was Colonia Marciana Ulpia Traiana Thamugadi. Emperor Trajan named the city in commemoration of his mother Marcia, eldest sister Ulpia Marciana, and father Marcus Ulpius Traianus.
Located in modern-day Algeria, about 35 kilometers (22 mi) east of the city of Batna, the ruins are noteworthy for representing one of the best extant examples of the grid plan as used in Roman town planning. Timgad was inscribed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1982.

Name
In the former name of Timgad, Marciana Traiana Thamugadi, the first part – Marciana Traiana – is Roman and refers to the name of its founder, Emperor Trajan and his sister Marciana. The second part of the name – Thamugadi – "has nothing Latin about it". Thamugadi is the Berber name of the place where the city was built, to read Timgad plural form of Tamgut, meaning "peak" or "summit".

History
The city was founded as a military colony by the emperor Trajan in the year 100 AD. It was intended to serve primarily as a Roman bastion against the Berbers in the nearby Aures Mountains, and it was originally populated largely by Roman veterans and colonists. Although most of them had never seen Rome before, and Timgad was hundreds of miles away from the Italian city, it invested heavily in Roman culture and identity.
The city enjoyed a peaceful existence for the first several hundred years and became a center of Christian activity starting in the 3rd century, and a Donatist center in the 4th century. During the Christian period, Timgad was a diocese which became renowned at the end of the 4th century when Bishop Optat became the spokesman for the Donatist movement. After Optat, Thamugadai had two bishops Gaudentius (Donatist) and Faustinus (Catholic).
In the 5th century, the city was sacked by the Vandals before falling into decline. Timgad was destroyed at the end of the 5th century by Berber tribes from the Aurès Mountains. In 539 AD, during the Moorish wars, the Byzantine general Solomon retook and rebuilt the city, incorporating it into Byzantine North Africa. The reconquest revived some activities in the city, which became part of a line of defense against the Moors. However, the early Muslim conquests brought about the final ruin of Thamugadi as it ceased to be inhabited by the 8th century.
Travelling Northern Africa, Scottish explorer James Bruce reached the city ruins on 12 December 1765, likely being the first European to visit the site in centuries and described the city as “a small town, but full of elegant buildings.” In 1790, he published the book Travels to Discover the Source of the Nile, where he described what he had found in Timgad. The book was met with skepticism in Great Britain, until 1875 when Robert Lambert Playfair, Britain's consul in Algiers, inspired by Bruce's account, visited the site. In 1877 Playfair described Timgad in more detail in his book Travels in the Footsteps of Bruce in Algeria and Tunis. According to Playfair, “These hills are covered with countless numbers of the most interesting mega-lithic remains”. The French colonists took control of the site in 1881, began investigations and maintained it until 1960. During this period, the site was systematically excavated.

It was by decision of the Ministry of Public Education and Fine Arts that excavations began in the 1880s in Timgad, and a post of chief architect of historical monuments of Algeria was created, with the aim of managing the service of historical monuments of Algeria and taking care of the excavation and restoration sites.

Description
Located at the intersection of six roads, the city was walled but not fortified.
Originally designed for a population of around 15,000, the city quickly outgrew its original specifications and spilled beyond the orthogonal grid in a more loosely organized fashion.
At the time of its founding, the area surrounding the city was a fertile agricultural area, about 1000 meters above sea level.
The original Roman grid plan is magnificently visible in the orthogonal design, highlighted by the decumanus maximus (east–west-oriented street) and the cardo (north–south-oriented street) lined by a partially restored Corinthian colonnade. The cardo does not proceed completely through the city but instead terminates in a forum at the intersection with the decumanus.
At the west end of the decumanus rises a 12 m high triumphal arch, called the Arch of Trajan, which was partially restored in 1900. The arch is principally of sandstone, and is of the Corinthian order with three arches, the central one being 11' wide. The arch is also known as the Timgad Arch.
A 3,500-seat theater is in good condition and is used for contemporary productions. The other key buildings include four thermae, a library, and a basilica.
The Capitoline Temple is dedicated to Jupiter and is of approximately the same dimensions as the Pantheon in Rome. Nearby the capitol is a square church, with a circular apse dating from the 7th century AD. One of the sanctuaries featured iconography of (Dea) Africa. South of the city is a large Byzantine citadel built in the later days of the city.

Library
The Library at Timgad was a gift to the Roman people by Julius Quintianus Flavius Rogatianus at a cost of 400,000 sesterces. As no additional information about this benefactor has been unearthed, the precise date of the library's construction remains uncertain. Based on the remaining archaeological evidence, it has been suggested by scholars that it dates from the late 3rd or possibly the 4th century.
The library occupies a rectangle 81 feet (25 meters) long by 77 feet (23 meters) wide. It consists of a large semi-circular room flanked by two secondary rectangular rooms, and preceded by a U-shaped colonnaded portico surrounding three sides on an open court. The portico is flanked by two long narrow rooms on each side, and the large vaulted hall would have combined the functions of a reading room, stack room, and perhaps a lecture room. Oblong alcoves held wooden shelves along walls that would likely have been complete with sides, backs and doors, based on additional evidence found at the library at Ephesus.
It is possible that free-standing bookcases in the center of the room, as well as a reading desk, might also have been present. While the architecture of the Library at Timgad is not especially remarkable, the discovery of the library is historically important as it shows the presence of a fully developed library system in this Roman city, indicating a high standard of learning and culture. While there is no evidence as to the size of the collection the library harbored, it is estimated that it could have accommodated 3,000 scrolls.

World Heritage Site
Timgad was inscribed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1982.

Gallery
See also
Djémila
Jerash
Lambaesis
Colonia (Roman)
List of cultural assets of Algeria

References
External links

UNESCO site on Timgad
Great Buildings entry on Timgad
Images of Timgad on Manar al-Athar digital heritage photography archive
Photos of Timgad
Information on Roman Africa
Map Location of Timgad



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: DJEMILA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: ancient_city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 17:59:31
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 656
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dj%C3%A9mila
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Djémila (Arabic: جميلة, romanized: Ǧamīlah, lit. 'Beautiful (one)'), formerly Cuicul, is a small mountain village in Algeria, near the northern coast east of Algiers, where some of the best preserved Roman ruins in North Africa are found. It is situated in the region bordering the Constantinois and Petite Kabylie (Basse Kabylie).
In 1982, Djémila became a UNESCO World Heritage Site for its unique adaptation of Roman architecture to a mountain environment. Significant buildings in ancient Cuicul include a theatre, two fora, temples, basilicas, arches, streets, and houses. The exceptionally well preserved ruins surround the forum of the Harsh, a large paved square with an entry marked by a majestic arch.

Roman Cuicul
Under the name of Cuicul, the city was built 900 metres (3,000 ft) above sea level during the 1st century AD as a Roman military garrison situated on a narrow triangular plateau in the province of Numidia. The terrain is somewhat rugged, being located at the confluence of two rivers. 

Cuicul's builders followed a standard plan with a forum at the center and two main streets, the Cardo Maximus and the Decumanus Maximus, composing the major axes. The city was initially populated by a colony of Roman soldiers from Italy, and eventually grew to become a large trading market. The resources that contributed to the prosperity of the city were essentially agricultural (cereals, olive trees and farm).
During the reign of Caracalla in the 3rd century, Cuicul's administrators took down some of the old ramparts and constructed a new forum. They surrounded it with larger and more impressive edifices than those that bordered the old forum.  The terrain hindered building, so that they built the theatre outside the town walls, which was exceptional.
In late antiquity, Cuicul was situated within the Roman province of Mauretania Sitifensis, and had an estimated population of around 10,000. Christianity became very popular in the 4th century (after some persecutions in the early third century), and by the fifth century, an ecclesiastical quarter was built, including three basilicas, a baptistery, auxiliary rooms, a bath, and a peristyle house. These structures are located to the south of Cuicul in a quarter called "Christian", and are popular attractions. 
Of the bishops of Cuicul, Pudentianus took part in the Council of Carthage (255) concerning the validity of heretical baptism, and Elpidophorus in the Council of Carthage (348). Cresconius was the Catholic bishop who represented Cuicul at the Council of Carthage (411) between Catholic and Donatist bishops; the Donatist bishop of the town died before the conference began. Crescens was one of the Catholic bishops whom the Arian Vandal king Huneric summoned to Carthage in 484. Victor was at the Second Council of Constantinople in 553. No longer a residential bishopric, Cuicul is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.
The city was slowly abandoned after the fall of the Roman Empire around the 5th century and 6th century. There were some improvements under emperor Justinian I, with wall reinforcements.
Muslims later dominated the region, but did not reoccupy the site of Cuicul, which they renamed Djémila ("beautiful" in Arabic).

3D documentation
The spatial documentation of Djémila took place during two Zamani Project field campaigns in 2009, which were undertaken in co-operation with Prof Hamza Zeghlache and his team from the University of Setif, Algeria, as well as the South African National Research Foundation (NRF). Several structures were documented, including the Baptistry, the Caracalla Gate, the Market, the Septimius-servus Temple and the Theatre.

Notable residents
Several significant Romanized Africans were born in Cuicul:

Lucius Alfenus Senecio: governor of Britannia (205 to 207).
Gaius Valerius Pudens: governor of Britannia.
Tiberius Claudius Subatianus Aquila: governor of Mesopotamia and Egypt.
Tiberius Claudius Subatianus Proculus: governor of Numidia.

Gallery
See also
Mauretania Caesariensis
Volubilis
List of cultural assets of Algeria

References
External links

Official UNESCO Site for Cuicul-Djémila
Photos of Cuicul (Djemila)
Djemila Multimedia
Images of Djemila in Manar al-Athar digital heritage photo archive



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: TIPAZA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: ancient_city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 17:59:39
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 311
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tipaza
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tipaza (Arabic: تيپازة, romanized: Tīpāza) is the capital of the Tipaza Province, Algeria. When it was part of the Roman Empire, it was called Tipasa. The modern town was founded in 1857, and is chiefly remarkable for its ancient ruins and sandy littoral.

History
Ancient history
Tipasa, as the city was then called, was an old Punic trading-post conquered by Ancient Rome. It was subsequently turned into a military colony by the emperor Claudius for the conquest of the kingdoms of Mauretania.
Afterwards, it became a municipium called Colonia Aelia Tipasensis, that reached a population of 20,000 inhabitants in the fourth century according to Stéphane Gsell.
The city served as an important Christian hub during the last centuries of Roman governorship, with three basilicas.
Tipasa was destroyed by the Vandals in 430 CE, but was reconstructed by the Byzantines one century later. At the end of the seventh century the city was demolished by Umayyad forces and reduced to ruins.
In the nineteenth century, the place was settled again. Now it is a town of nearly 30,000 inhabitants. The city is an important tourist place in modern Algeria, mainly because of the Tipasa ruins.

Modern era
Near Tipaza, the Tipaza longwave transmitter broadcasts French language Channel 3 radio programs from the Algerian Broadcasting Company. The longwave frequency 252 kHz can be well received in many parts of Europe.
The town and its surroundings are home to the largest Berber-speaking group of western Algeria, the Chenoua people. Majority of the Bouriba family reside in this area.
The Tipaza station in 252 kHz had previously been out of service since March 17, 2014, but is broadcasting again at 252 kHz.

Gallery
See also
List of lighthouses in Algeria
Tipasa
Tipaza Province
Ain Taya Forest
El-Marsa Forest
Algeria
Mahelma Forest
Bologhine Forest
El-Mouradia Forest
Bachdjerrah forest

References
External links

Tipasa Museum
Site of Unesco



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: ROYAL MAUSOLEUM OF MAURETANIA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: archaeological_site | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 17:59:48
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 978
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Royal_Mausoleum_of_Mauretania
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Royal Mausoleum of Mauretania is a funerary monument located on the road between Cherchell and Algiers, in Tipaza Province, Algeria. 
The mausoleum is the tomb where the Berber King Juba II (son of Juba I of Numidia) and the Queen Cleopatra Selene II, sovereigns of Mauretania, were allegedly buried. However, their human remains are no longer at the site.
The Royal Mausoleum of Mauretania is a common type of ancient mausoleums found in Algeria built on a hill some 250 metres (756 feet) above sea level. The monument is entirely built from stone, while its main structure is in a circular form with a square base topped by a cone or a pyramid. The square base measures 60 to 60.9 metres square or 200 to 209 foot. The height of the monument was originally about 40 metres or 130’ in height. Due to damage that the mausoleum has suffered from natural elements and vandalism, the monument now measures 30-32.4 metres in height. 
The base of the monument was decorated with 60 Ionic columns whose capitals were removed, possibly stolen. Inside, the centre of the mausoleum has two vaulted chambers, separated by a short passage connected by a gallery outside by stone doors which can be moved up and down by levers. The passage leading to the chambers is about 500’. One chamber measures 142 feet long by 11 feet broad and is 11 feet high, while the other is smaller.

History
The sepulchre is sometimes known as the Mausoleum of Juba II and Cleopatra Selene. In French, it is called the Tombeau de la Chrétienne ("the tomb of the Christian woman") because there is a Christian cross-like shape of the division lines on the false door. In Arabic, the mausoleum is called the Kubr-er-Rumia or Kbor er Roumia, which means "tomb of the Christian woman", as Rûm was taken in Arabic as the Eastern Roman Empire and, in North Africa, rumi took the meaning "Christian".
It may have been a deformation of a Punic phrase for "the royal tomb".

Royal Family of Mauretania
The mausoleum was built in 3 BC by the King of Mauretania, Juba II (son of Juba I of Numidia) and his wife Cleopatra Selene II. She was a Greek Ptolemaic princess, the daughter of the Queen Cleopatra VII of Egypt and Roman Triumvir Mark Antony. Through her marriage to Juba II, she became Queen of Mauretania.
The mausoleum is probably the Royal Tomb that the 1st-century Roman geographer Pomponius Mela (1.31) described as the monumentum commune regiae gentis ("the communal mausoleum of the royal family"). If the geographer’s description of the mausoleum is correct, then the building was not intended just for Juba and Cleopatra, but envisaged as a dynastic funeral monument for their royal descendants.
The Mauretanian sepulchre looks similar to the Mausoleum of Augustus erected by the first Roman Emperor Augustus in Ancient Rome. Augustus began constructing his mausoleum between 29 BC-27 BC, some time before Juba II left Rome to return to Numidia.

Under the Ottomans and French
In the 16th century, the mausoleum was believed by some Spaniards to be the tomb of Florinda la Cava, the legendary berber woman from Ceuta, whose rape led to the Islamic conquest of Iberia.
It has been explained as a confusion of Qabr Arrumiyya ("Christian tomb", locally qbér érromiya) and qàhba romiya ("Christian whore").
In 1555, the Pasha of Algiers, Salah Rais, gave orders to pull down the mausoleum. After large black wasps swarmed out and stung some of the workers to death, the effort was abandoned. At the end of the 18th century, Baba Mahommed tried in vain to destroy the monument with artillery.
Following the French occupation of Algeria, the monument was used by the French Navy for target practice.

Recognition and conservation of the Mausoleum
The human remains of Juba II and Cleopatra Selene have not been found at the site. This is perhaps due to a grave robbery that occurred at an uncertain time (possibly shortly after the Mausoleum's construction). It is also possible that the structure was simply meant to serve as a memorial and not an actual place of burial.
The Royal Mausoleum of Mauretania is a part of a unique archeological site along the road from Cherchell to Tipaza. On this archeological site, there are various monuments and infrastructure that have survived from the Phoenician (see also Carthage National Museum), Roman, Early Christianity and Byzantine periods. This group of ruins that are located along the Mediterranean Sea were recognized and inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1982.
Although these archaeological remains, including the Royal Mausoleum of Mauretania, are protected, the ruins located between Cherchell and Tipaza face constant threats from continual urban construction and expansion, open sewage drainage run offs, poor maintenance, and constant vandalism. Due to these ongoing problems, these archaeological remains face an uncertain future.
The local authorities have failed and had problems implementing a 1992 ‘Permanent Safeguarding and Presentation Plan’ an effective management program in preserving these ruins. In 2001, the World Heritage Site provided emergency assistance for this archaeological site. In 2002, experts from UNESCO went to visit the site and to report on the condition of the ruins; the archeological site has been placed on the List of World Heritage Sites in Danger.

See also
Berber mythology
Madghacen
Tin Hinan Tomb
List of cultural assets of Algeria

Citations
Sources
Duane R. Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene: Royal Scholarship on Rome's African Frontier. New York and London: Routledge, 2003
Juba II & Cleopatra Selene
Page at UNESCO website
Algeria: Archeological Finds Reveal a Varied Past

External links
Duane R. Roller, The World of Juba II and Kleopatra Selene: Royal Scholarship on Rome's African Frontier. New York and London: Routledge, 2003
images of the Royal Mausoleum (Tomb of the Christian) on Manar al-Athar digital image archive



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: HIPPO REGIUS
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: ancient_city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 17:59:56
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 974
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hippo_Regius
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hippo Regius (also known as Hippo or Hippone) is the ancient name of the modern city of Annaba, Algeria. It served as an important city for the Phoenicians, Berbers, Romans, and Vandals. Hippo was the capital city of the Vandal Kingdom from AD 435 to 439, after which it was shifted to Carthage following the Vandal capture of Carthage in 439.
It was the focus of several early Christian councils and home to Augustine of Hippo, a Church Father highly important in Western Christianity.

History
Hippo is the latinization of ʿpwn (Punic: 𐤏𐤐𐤅‬𐤍), probably related to the word ûbôn, meaning "harbor". The town was first settled by Phoenicians from Tyre around the 12th century BC. To distinguish it from Hippo Diarrhytus (the modern Bizerte, in Tunisia), the Romans later referred to it as Hippo Regius ("the Royal Hippo") because it was one of the residences of the Numidian kings. Its nearby river was Latinized as the Ubus and the bay to its east was known as Hippo Bay (Latin: Hipponensis Sinus).
A maritime city near the mouth of the river Ubus, it became a Roman colonia which prospered and became a major city in Roman Africa. It served as the bishopric of Saint Augustine of Hippo in his later years. In AD 430, the Vandals advanced eastwards along the North African coast and laid siege to the walled city of Hippo Regius. Inside, Saint Augustine and his priests prayed for relief from the invaders, knowing full well that the fall of the city would spell death or conversion to the Arian confession for much of the Christian population. On 28 August 430, three months into the siege, St. Augustine (who was 75 years old) died, perhaps from starvation or stress, as the wheat fields outside the city lay dormant and unharvested. Hunger and the inevitable diseases were ravaging both the city inhabitants and the Vandals outside the city walls who lifted the siege after 14 months. The peace treaty of 435 acknowledged the Vandals' possession of the city and King Geiseric made it the first capital of the Vandal Kingdom until the capture of Carthage in 439.
It was conquered by the Eastern Roman Empire in 534 and was kept under Roman rule until 698, when it fell to the Muslims; the Arabs rebuilt the town in the eighth century. The city's later history is treated under its modern (Arabic and colonial) names.
About three kilometres distant in the eleventh century, the Berber Zirids established the town of Beled-el-Anab, which the Spaniards occupied for some years in the sixteenth century, as the French did later, in the reign of Louis XIV. France took this town again in 1832. It was renamed Bône or Bona, and became one of the government centres for the Constantine (departement) in Algeria. It had 37,000 inhabitants, of whom 10,800 were original inhabitants, consisting of 9,400 Muslims and 1,400 naturalized Jews. 15,700 were French and 10,500 foreigners, including many Italians.

Ecclesiastical history
Hippo was an ancient bishopric, one of many suffragans in the former Roman province of Numidia, a part of the residential see of Constantine. It contains some ancient ruins, a hospital built by the Little Sisters of the Poor and a fine basilica dedicated to St. Augustine. Under St. Augustine there were at least three monasteries in the diocese besides the episcopal monastery.
The diocese was established around 250 AD. Only these eight bishops of Hippo are known:

Saint Theogenes(256? – martyr 259?)
Saint Leontius (died 303?)
Fidentius (martyr ?304)
Valerius (388?–396), who ordained St. Augustine
the "Doctor of Grace", Saint Augustine (354 – 28 August 430, coadjutor in 395, bishop in 396)
Heraclius (coadjutor in 426, bishop in 430).
Palmatius, attended Synod of Carthage in 525
Urban, circa 705
It was suppressed around 450 AD.

Council of Hippo
Three church councils were held at Hippo (393, 394, 426) and more synods – also in 397 (two sessions, June and September) and 401, all under Aurelius.
The synods of the Ancient (North) African church were held, with but few exceptions (e.g. Hippo, 393; Milevum, 402) at Carthage. We know from the letters of Saint Cyprian that, except in time of persecution, the African bishops met at least once a year, in the springtime, and sometimes again in the autumn. Six or seven synods, for instance, were held under St. Cyprian's presidency during the decade of his administration (249–258), and more than fifteen under Aurelius (391–429). The Synod of Hippo of 393 ordered a general meeting yearly, but this was found too onerous for the bishops, and in the Synod of Carthage (407) it was decided to hold a general synod only when necessary for the needs of all Africa, and it was to be held at a place most convenient for the purpose. Not all the bishops of the country were required to assist at the general synod. At the Synod of Hippo (393) it was ordered that "dignities" should be sent from each ecclesiastical province. Only one was required from Tripoli (in Libya), because of the poverty of the bishops of that province. At the Synod of Hippo (393), and again at the Synod of 397 at Carthage, a list of the books of Holy Scripture was drawn up, and these books are still regarded as the constituents of the Catholic canon.

Titular episcopal see
The Hippo(ne) diocese was nominally revived in 1400 as Catholic Latin titular bishopric of the (lowest) episcopal rank, for which no incumbent is recorded.
It ceased to exist on 23 September 1867, when the see was formally united with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Constantine.

See also
Auzia
Caesarea of Mauretania
Cirta
Chullu
Mauretania Caesariensis
Milevum
List of cultural assets of Algeria

Notes
References
Sources
Further reading
External links
GigaCatholic, with residential episcopal incumbents biography links Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: GHARDAIA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:00:21
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,997
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gharda%C3%AFa
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ghardaïa (Arabic: غرداية, Tumzabt: Taɣerdayt) is the capital city of Ghardaïa Province, Algeria. The commune of Ghardaïa has a population of 93,423 according to the 2008 census, up from 87,599 in 1998, with an annual growth rate of 0.7%.
It is located in northern-central Algeria in the Sahara and lies along the left bank of the Wadi Mzab. The M'zab in the Ghardaïa Province was made a World Heritage Site in 1982, as a cultural property evaluated under the criteria II (for its settlement affecting urban planning even to the present century), III (for its Ibadi cultural values), and V (a settlement culture which has prevailed to the present century).
Ghardaïa is part of a pentapolis, a hilltop city amongst four others, built almost a thousand years ago in the M’Zab valley. It was founded by the Mozabites, an Ibadi sect of the Berber Muslims.
It is a major centre of date production and the manufacture of rugs and cloths. Divided into three walled sectors, it is a fortified town. At the centre is the historical Mʾzabite area, with a pyramid-style mosque and an arcaded square. Distinctive white, pink, and red houses, made of sand, clay and gypsum, rise in terraces and arcades.
In her 1963 book, La Force des choses, the French existentialist philosopher Simone de Beauvoir described Ghardaïa as "a Cubist painting beautifully constructed".

Etymology
The name of Ghardaïa has its origins in a female saint named Daïa who lived in a cave (ghār) in the area before it blossomed into a town inhabited by Ibadi Muslims who came to escape persecution from the Fatimid Caliphate in the north.

History
The M'Zab valley, in limestone plateau, was inscribed under the UNESCO Heritage List, is a unique conglomeration of five cities confined in area of 75 km² situated 600 km to the south of Algiers, the capital of Algeria.
The original architecture of the semi desert valley is dated to early 11th century. It is ascribed to the Ibadis, with their cultural identity originally traced to the Maghreb; they had their capital at Tahert as an Ibadi Kingdom. They were forced to leave Tahert consequent to a devastating fire in 909 (it is reported that destruction was caused by the founder of the (Shi'ite) Fatimid Dynasty). They first moved to Sedrata and finally to the M'Zab valley. They settled in five fortified villages located on rocky outcrops, known locally as “Kosars”, although they could have lived in one larger village encompassing all the five. The habitation was planned with meticulous details to precise layouts defined by set principles of community living within a defensive environment. Ghardaïa's foundation has been dated to 1048 or 1053.
Each village was planned in a diverse topography comprising a small island, a ridge, a hilltop, a peak and a recess. The villages were fortified in such a manner that they were inaccessible to the nomadic groups. The five villages set up with identical planning concepts were Ghardaïa, Melika, Beni Isguen, Bou Noura and El Atteuf. The identical “miniature citadels”, as they are termed, each had their own mosque with minaret functioning as watch towers, and the houses built around the mosque in concentric circles and surrounded by a high walls (extending up to the ramparts). The buildings together gave the feel of a fortress to each village. The mosque also provided for storage of grains and arms for defence.
However, during the summer season the inhabitants migrated to a "citadel" outside the fortified villages, in an informal setting of artificial palm grove, a cemetery and a mosque.
The ksar was created in 476/1085 by two tribes : the Aoulad Ammi-Aïssa and the Aoulad Ba-Slimane. Each tribe contained different fractions, a specific area and a cemetery. Ghardaïa is the richest city of the M'Zab Vallée. It already had a dynamic commercial and craft activity. On the social aspect, it is the only Ksar, along with Melika, that housed not only Ibadites Berbers, but also Malekits Arabs and a Jewish community until the Algerian Independence.
To build the Ksar, the founders of Ghardaïa, a small group of people, under a Cheikh, chose a hill 200m south of the M'Zab Oued for defensive purposes. Farther west, they created a palm grove for subsistence farming. The Ksar of Ghardaïa, as it is today, did not appear in one time. According to the public agency in charge of protecting the M'Zab Heritage, Ghardaïa has seen four phases of evolution until 1882, when it was annexed by the French army.

Geography
The city is located within the Sahara Desert in northern-central Algeria. Ghardaïa Province is divided into 13 communes or municipalities, which includes the Ghardaïa municipality. It is bordered by Ouargla and El Bayadh Wilayas. It is nestled in the M'zab valley, lying on the left bank of the Wadi Mzab, which is commonly dry throughout the year. The commune of Ghardaïa now covers an area of 590 km2 (230 sq mi) and includes a number of suburbs, towns and villages in addition to Ghardaïa. Suburb settlements include Mélika, Béni Isguen, Bounoura (Has Bunur) and El Atteuf (Tadjnint), all of which lie to the southeast of Ghardaïa city and the ancient ksar of Metlili-Chaamba or Metlili which lies 42 km (26 mi) to the southwest. Outside of the Mzab Valley, Berriane (Has Ibergane) and El Guerrara (Iguerraren) are towns of note, the first 45 km (28 mi) to the north, and the second 110 km (68 mi) to the northeast.

Hydrology
Ghardaïa's ancient water distribution system was devised by the Mozabites, as a response to the ephemeral flows of its oueds (rivers). Realising the preciousness of this natural resource, the Mozabites developed a unique hydraulic system of tunnels to harvest rainwater and divert it to the oases. They have an equitable water distribution to all gardens and also maintain good flood protection measures. The water supply is accessed in a number of ways through a complex irrigation system that distributes water from many wells. Well drilling extends to a depth ranging from 350 ft (110 m) to 500 ft (150 m), drawing the water from the Albian fossil groundwater continental infill whose reserves are estimated at 1.5 trillion m3.

Climate
Ghardaïa has a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification BWh), with extremely hot summers and mild winters. The region is marked by large temperature differences between day and night, and summer and winter ranging from lows of 5 °C (41 °F)  to highs of 46 °C (114.8 °F). The prevailing winds of summer are extremely hot, extremely dry and strong, while winter winds are warm and dry. Sandstorms generally occur from March to May. In October 2008, Ghardaïa was severely affected by flooding due to heavy rain.

Layout and architecture
The unique layout of the Ghardaïa village is dictated by the rocky terrain of the region. Apart from the mosques and the housing pattern layout, with the mosque at the top of the hill, and the houses laid in labyrinthine alleyways, there is also a large market centre. The houses in particular are oriented in such a way that admits sunlight into every dwelling, as this is strongly believed to be healthy: "Inhabitants of the house where sun comes in will never see a doctor". Chimneys are also set in such a way that they do not encroach upon the comfort of neighbours.

Economy
Ghardaïa is a major centre of date production, with nearly 60,000 palm trees producing dates. The wood of dead palms is used to make house roofs; live trees are not killed, as they are considered living beings that sustain the inhabitants.
Another important industry is the manufacture of rugs and cloths.
Metlili-Chaamba is known for its "Deglet Nour" dates and its camel hair products. One important aspect of the social life and economic values of the people of the region is that begging and theft are non-existent in the community. The society is close-knit, and all aspects of economy and social customs are dictated by the community.

Culture
The residents have preserved the original medieval architecture remarkably well; the valley to which Ghardaïa belongs is part of an official World Heritage Site. The Medabian quarter lies to the northwest. The military compound and hospital are located in the southern area. The city is called "the pearl of the oasis", and is one of the most important tourist regions in southern Algeria due to its ancient cultural heritage. Apart from tourism, the Wilaya of Ghardaïa also draws anthropologists, architects, researchers and historians to explore its rich cultural, anthropological and architectural uniqueness. An interesting aspect of community welfare is the fact that they follow the rules of governance diligently, and also contribute to the maintenance and care of the community. Mozabites in the light of their rigid approach in negotiations, dominate the financial sector, particularly in banking and wholesale sectors. They also have their own mosque, cemetery, recreation and sporting activities. They have a patriarchal system of social inheritance. Another unique feature among the Mozabites is that starting from birth a “Mozabite is looked after by the community for education, work, marriage, and the building of a home. Touiza (groups of volunteers) are organised for building houses.” The Wilaya of Ghardaïa is also well known for its Weaving, Dinanderie D'art, basketry, pottery and carpet weaving (tapestry). The rugs of the area are so popular that every year the "National Day Of Rugs" is held in March.
The Mozabites of Ghardaïa have their distinct identity of traditional costume of saroual loubia (baggy trousers) and chéchia (headgear).

Festivals
Every spring, the commune of Metlili-Chaamba, 31.3 km (19.4 mi) from Ghardaïa, celebrates the "Day mehr" when people from all over the country attend and participate in a camel race.
In March and April, a carpet festival provides an opportunity for celebration, competition, as well as sales.

Religion
Ghardaïa is the traditional heart of the M'zab valley and home of the Ibadi religious sect in Algeria. They do not subscribe to the doctrines of Sunnism and Shi'ism. They practice a different way of praying, worshipping of God, and designing mosques compared to Malikis, who form the majority of Algerians. The wastage of water, and more generally any gift of land, is considered a sin. The Ghardaïa Mosque, built in the 10th century, is of Moorish architecture style. Its tower, simple and elegant, includes a large portal at the top of the shaft, the design of which provides for ventilation flow.
The White Fathers, a Roman Catholic missionary society, live in a hermitage near the old city, and have a collection of books on the Sahara. The pro-cathedral still testifies to the time when it was the seat from 1901 successively of the Apostolic Prefecture of Ghardaïa; the province was renamed as the Apostolic Prefecture of Ghardaïa in the Sahara, in 1948 promoted to the Apostolic Vicariate of Ghardaïa in the Sahara, and then in 1955 was promoted to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Laghouat (where the cathedral is meanwhile secularized; the diocese is still exempt).

Jewish Sign Language
Until Algerian independence, Ghardaïa was home to a significant Jewish community, of which many were deaf. The deaf Jews of Ghardaïa developed their own village sign language, which they took with them when the community left for France and Israel. The language is considered moribund.

Education
6.5% of the population has a tertiary education, and another 18.2% has completed secondary education. The overall literacy rate is 87.4%, and is 93.2% among males and 81.5% among females.

Transportation
The town is served by Noumérat – Moufdi Zakaria Airport (or simply Ghardaïa airport). There is also a bus station. The airport is named after Algerian writer Moufdi Zakaria, who was born in Ghardaïa.

Localities
The commune of Ghardaïa is composed of nine localities:

Notable people from Ghardaïa
Moufdi Zakaria, Mozabite poet from At izjen Beni isgen, authored the national anthem
Cheikh Bayoud, Mozabite leader of the reformist movement in the south.
Mokhtar Belmokhtar, Algerian former military commander of al-Mulathameen (The Masked Brigade).

Gallery



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: BENI HAMMAD FORT
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: archaeological_site | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:00:31
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,216
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qal%27at_Bani_Hammad
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Qal'at Bani Hammad (Arabic: قلعة بني حماد), also known as Qal'a Bani Hammad or Qal'at of the Beni Hammad (among other variants), is a fortified palatine city in Algeria. Now in ruins, in the 11th century, it served as the first capital of the Hammadid dynasty. It is in the Hodna Mountains northeast of M'Sila, at an elevation of 1,418 metres (4,652 ft), and receives abundant water from the surrounding mountains. The site is near the town of Maadid (aka Maadhid), about 225 kilometres (140 mi) southeast of Algiers, in the Maghreb.
In 1980, it was inscribed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO under the name Al Qal'a of Beni Hammad, and described as "an authentic picture of a fortified Muslim city".
The town includes a 7-kilometre (4 mi) long line of walls. Inside the walls are four residential complexes, and the largest mosque built in Algeria after that of Mansurah. It is similar in design to the Grand Mosque of Kairouan, with a tall minaret, 20 metres (66 ft).
Excavations have brought to light numerous terracotta, jewels, coins and ceramics testifying to the high level of civilization under the Hammadid dynasty.  Also among the artifacts discovered are several decorative fountains using the lion as a motif. The remains of the emir's palace, known as Dar al-Bahr, include three separate residences separated by gardens and pavilions.

History
The fortress was built in 1007 by Hammad ibn Buluggin, the son of Buluggin ibn Ziri, and the founder of Algiers. The city became the capital of the Hammadid Berbers, and sustained a siege from the Zirid in 1017. In 1090, it was abandoned under the menace of the Banu Hilal, and was partly destroyed by the Almohads in 1152.
The Qalaa was described by Al-Bakri in the 11th century as a large and powerful military stronghold and a centre of commerce that attracted caravans from all over the Maghreb, Iraq, Syria, Egypt and the Hejaz. Ibn Khaldun also noted that the abundance of travellers was due to the wealth of resources offered to those interested in sciences, commerce and arts. The Qala attracted poets, sages and theologians. The architecture of the Hammadids even influenced that of the Normans. 
Excavations began in 1908, resumed from 1952-1956 and continue to this day as most of the site remains unexplored and the aspects of the palaces await further study.

Architecture
Overview
The Qalaa was described by Al-Bakri in the 11th century as a large and powerful military stronghold and a centre of commerce that attracted caravans from all over the Maghreb, Iraq, Syria, Egypt and the Hejaz. Ibn Khaldun also noted that the abundance of travellers was due to the wealth of resources offered to those interested in sciences, commerce and arts. The Qala attracted poets, sages and theologians. The architecture of the Hammadids even influenced that of the Normans.

Palaces
Hammadid emirs constructed five palaces, most of which are now destroyed. The keep of the Palace of the Fanal (Qasr al-Manar) does survive. The upper palace consists of three buildings arranged around an irregularly shaped forecourt: a private apartment, a domed hall and an entrance wing.
Other palaces such as the Qasr al-Kawab and Qasr al-Salam were constructed by the Hammadids. The Qasr al-Salam likely served as the residence of the ruler's family, and this structure summarises many aspects of typical Hammadid architecture. The Qasr al-Manar is another palace, its layout has resemblance to the Upper palace and Qasr al-Salam as its main elements are composed of a forecourt with an audience hall and a private apartment both surrounded with T-shaped pillared porticos.

Dar al-Bahr, the Lake Palace
The Dar al-Bahar (or Qsar al-Bahr) which is located nearby the congregational mosque was most likely used for public audiences and/or the palace of the Emir. The eastern court occupied by a large water basin inspired the name of the palace. Located between two courtyards is the main reception room, and a domed hall is located north of the water court. The outer walls consist of buttresses varying in design. As for the water courtyard, the court is 71 meters long and 51 meters wide while the basin is 68 meters long, 48 meters wide and 1.3 meters deep. The courtyard was surrounded on all sides by T-shaped pillared porticos.
The Dar al-Bahr palace was named for its rectangular pool, which measured 67 by 47 metres (220 by 154 ft). A ramp at one end of the pool was used to launch boats.  References to nautical displays in this pool appear in the accounts of contemporary visitors. The pool was surrounded by a portico, and accessed through a monumental entrance on the east side. West of the pool was an elevated terrace and courtyard with gardens. Outside the walls of the palace complex, gardens extended east-to-west across the city, and to a depth of nearly 100 metres (330 ft). The gardens have not yet been explored by archeologists, although ornamental fountains have been discovered.

Mosque
The Hammadid mosque is said to have been the largest mosque constructed in North Africa prior to the twentieth century and it features the typical Maghreb style square minaret. In Qal'at Beni Hammad, the minaret, 82 feet (25 m) in height, is the only remaining part of the ruined Great Mosque; the structure bears some resemblance to Seville's Giralda.

Decoration
Architecture in Qalaat Beni Hammad featured adornments of "porcelain mosaics of many-colored faience, sculpted panels and plaster, enameled terra-cotta stalactites; building and pottery ornamentation consisted of geometric designs and stylized floral motifs."
In the Qal’at Beni Hammad fragments of stucco were discovered from the Qasr al-Salam and the Qasr al-Manar which may be the oldest fragments of muqarnas in the Western Islamic world, dating back to the 11th or 12th century. There are no earlier examples of muqarnas in the Islamic West. According to Lucien Golvin the fragments of the muqarnas semi-dome at the Qasr al-Salam are the oldest documented remains of a true muqarnas vault in the Islamic world. However, other scholars of Islamic architecture have questioned or rejected the dating of these fragments or their identification as true muqarnas.
Furthermore, the Qal’at buildings are considered to be documented antecedents and precursors to certain developments in Western Islamic art in the 12th century. Plaster capitals that were found at the Qal’at were composed of smooth leaves recurved in their upper part are considered to be an antecedent to the common Almoravid and Almohad forms which are seen in the Great Mosque of Tlemcen or in Tinmel. The framework of a marble basin and a grey marble fragment document the use of multifoil arches with spiral-form impost decoration. The use of this motif at the Qal’at subsequently spread during the times of the Almoravids and became universal in Almohad buildings. The square rooms surrounded by rampant barrel vaults in the Qasr al-Manar have been compared to the Almohad minarets and the Torre Pisana in Palermo which it predates. The Hammadid palaces are also noted to contain the first or one of the first documented use of shadirwan.

Gallery
See also
History of medieval Arabic and Western European domes

References
External links

UNESCO Site for Al Qal'a of Beni Hammad
Site plan
Images of Qal'at Bani Hammad (Kalaa Beni Hammad) in Manar al-Athar digital heritage photo archive



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: TASSILI N'AJJER
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: archaeological_site | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:00:40
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 3,323
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tassili_n%27Ajjer
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tassili n'Ajjer (Berber: Tassili n Ajjer, Arabic: طاسيلي ناجر, romanized: ṭāssīlī naʾjir; "Plateau of rivers") is a mountain range in the Sahara desert, located in south-eastern Algeria. It holds one of the most important groupings of prehistoric cave art in the world and covers an area of more than 72,000 km2 (28,000 sq mi).
The site has been designated a national park and a Biosphere Reserve, and was inducted into the UNESCO World Heritage Site list in 1982.
The literal English translation of Tassili n'Ajjer is 'plateau of rivers'.

Geography
Tassili n'Ajjer is a plateau in south-eastern Algeria at the borders of Libya and Niger, covering an area of 72,000 km2. It ranges from 26°20′N 5°00′E east-south-east to 24°00′N 10°00′E. Its highest point is the Adrar Afao that peaks at 2,158 m (7,080 ft), located at 25°10′N 8°11′E. The nearest towns are Djanet on the southeastern edge and Illizi on the northern edge.
The plateau is of great geological and aesthetic interest. Its panorama of geological formations of rock forests, composed of eroded sandstone, resembles a lunar landscape and hosts a range of rock art styles.

Geology
The range is composed largely of sandstone. The sandstone is stained by desert varnish, a thin outer layer of deposited metallic oxides that colour the rock formations variously from near-black to dull red. Erosion in the area has resulted in nearly 300 natural rock arches being formed in the south east, along with deep gorges and permanent water pools in the north.

The Tuareg Shield, an accumulation of terranes that formed during the Neoproterozoic era between 750 and 550 million years ago, encompassed the area of today's Ahaggar Mountains in Algeria, the Aïr Mountains in Niger, and the Adrar des Ifoghas in Mali. To the west lies the West African Craton, to the east the Saharan Metacraton. It expanded through accretion in the north and south, so that it also encompassed the area of today's Tassili n'Ajjer. During this epoch, the supercontinent Gondwana formed, which also included all the cratons and shields of what would later become Africa.
During the subsequent Cambrian period (541 to 485 million years ago), the first sediment deposits still present today were formed in the Tassili n'Ajjer region. During this epoch, Gondwana shifted from the equatorial zone to the southern hemisphere, so that the Sahara region was located in the South Pole region during the Upper Ordovician (458 to 443 million years ago). At the end of this period, the 'Hirnantian’ ice age prevailed for a million years. An ice sheet formed, covering much of the northern half of Africa.
In the early Silurian period (starting 443 million years ago), the global climate changed, causing the ice of the Tuareg Shield to melt. This left behind meltwater channels that had formed under the ice. This completed the formation of the geological stratigraphy of the Inner Tassili Group. It consists mainly of sandstone and some layers of clay.

During the Silurian and Devonian periods, transgression (the advance of the sea) from the north and northwest covered large areas of the Sahara with further layers of sediment. At that time, the Tassili n'Ajjer was the seabed near the coast, later becoming a fluvial floodplain. During the Silurian period, the stratigraphic sequence of the Intra Tassili Group was formed, which contains a lot of bioturbated clay and some sandstone. During the Devonian period, the formations of the External Tassili Group were formed, which contain a lot of sandstone alongside clays with macrofauna and some limestone. It is primarily from these two stratigraphic sequences of the Silurian and Devonian periods that petroleum and natural gas have been and continue to be extracted in the Illizi Basin, north of Illizi.
During the following 200 million years, this region remained geologically a rather quiet, fairly flat mainland area without major tectonic changes or sedimentation. - Probably as early as the Cretaceous period, but especially since the Miocene (23 to 5,3 million years ago), the Tuareg Shield began to arch as a result of magmatic uplift. The uplift in the Ahaggar region ultimately reached 4,000 to 5,000 m. The Tassili n'Ajjer region was also affected, and the uplift caused its layers to tilt toward the north. Parallel to the uplift, several basins formed north and south of the Tuareg Shield, which now served as deposition areas for the eroded sediment, for example the Illizi Basin. Especially in the Miocene, the sedimentary layers of the External Tassili (the uppermost layer sequence) were completely eroded in the southern and eastern parts of the Tassili n'Ajjer. In the northern part, on the plateau of this layer group, the river systems dug up to 400 m deep into the sandstone and clay layers due to the now greater gradient.
The last major geological change occurred during the Pliocene (5,3 to 2,58 million years ago). Volcanism covered the Adrar region in southwestern Tassili n'Ajjer with craters, volcanic cones, and lava flows. This development continued into the early Quaternary period.

Ecology
Tassili n'Ajjer lies within the West Saharan montane xeric woodlands ecoregion. Due to the higher elevation of the area, coupled with the water-retentive properties of the sandstone, the vegetation here is somewhat more lush and verdant than in the lower regions of desert; in turn, this creates an attractive habitat for numerous animal species, from the smallest invertebrates, up the food chain to mammals. The park features an open woodland, primarily consisting of the endangered and endemic Saharan cypress and Saharan myrtle, in its higher-elevation eastern half. The Tassili cypress is one of the longest-living trees and organisms on Earth, after the bristlecone pines of the Western US.
An isolated population of the West African crocodile survived in Tassili n'Ajjer until the twentieth century; today, the species is primarily found in more tropical and sub-Saharan regions of Western and Central Africa, from Senegal to Chad. The aoudad, or Barbary sheep, is the only extant species of animal depicted in the area's ancient rock artwork.
The park has been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports significant populations of spotted, crowned and Lichtenstein's sandgrouse, Pharaoh eagle-owls, greater hoopoe-larks, bar-tailed and desert larks, pale rock martins, fulvous babblers, white-crowned and mourning wheatears, desert sparrows and trumpeter finches.

Archaeology
Background
Algerian rock art has been subject to European study since 1863, with surveys conducted by "A. Pomel (1893–1898), Stéphane Gsell (1901–1927), G. B. M. Flamand (1892–1921), Leo Frobenius and Hugo Obermaier (1925), Henri Breuil (1931–1957), L. Joleaud (1918–1938), and Raymond Vaufrey (1935–1955)."
Tassili was already well known by the early 20th century, but Westerners were broadly introduced to it through a series of sketches made by French legionnaires, particularly Lieutenant Charles Brenans in the 1930s. He brought with him French archaeologist Henri Lhote, who would later return during 1956–1957, 1959, 1962, and 1970. Lhote's expeditions have been heavily criticized, with his team accused of faking images and of damaging paintings in brightening them for tracing and photography, which resulted in reducing the original colors beyond repair.

Current archaeological interpretation
The site of Tassili was primarily occupied during the Neolithic period by transhumant pastoralist groups whose lifestyle benefited both humans and livestock. The local geography, elevation, and natural resources were optimal conditions for dry-season camping of small groups. The wadis within the mountain range functioned as corridors between the rocky highlands and the sandy lowlands. The highlands have archaeological evidence of occupation dating from 5500 to 1500 BCE, while the lowlands have stone tumuli and hearths dating between 6000 and 4000 BCE. The lowland locations appear to have been used as living sites, specifically during the rainy season. There are numerous rock shelters within the sandstone forests, strewn with Neolithic artifacts including ceramic pots and potsherds, lithic arrowheads, bowls and grinders, beads, and jewelry.
The transition to pastoralism following the African Humid period during the early Holocene is reflected in Tassili n'Ajjer's archaeological material record, rock art, and zooarchaeology. Further, the occupation of Tassili is part of a larger movement and climate shift within the Central Sahara. Paleoclimatic and paleoenvironment studies started in the Central Sahara around 14,000 BP and then proceeded by an arid period that resulted in narrow ecological niches. However, the climate was not consistent and the Sahara was split between the arid lowlands and the humid highlands. Archaeological excavations confirm that human occupation, in the form of hunter-gather groups, occurred between 10,000 and 7500 BP; following 7500 BP, humans began to organize into pastoral groups in response to the increasingly unpredictable climate. There was a dry period from 7900 and 7200 BP in Tassili that preceded the appearance of the first pastoral groups, which is consistent with other parts of the Saharan-Sahelian belt. The pre-Pastoral pottery excavated from Tassili dates around 9,000–8,500 BP, while the Pastoral pottery is from 7100–6000 BP.
The rock art at Tassili is used in conjunction with other sites, including Dhar Tichitt in Mauritania, to study the development of animal husbandry and trans-Saharan travel in North Africa. Cattle were herded across vast areas as early as 3000–2000 BCE, reflecting the origins and spread of pastoralism in the area. This was followed by horses (before 1000 BCE) and then the camel in the next millennium. The arrival of camels reflects the increased development of trans-Saharan trade, as camels were primarily used as transport in trade caravans.

Prehistoric art
The rock formation is an archaeological site, noted for its numerous prehistoric parietal works of rock art, first reported in 1910, that date to the early Neolithic era at the end of the last glacial period during which the Sahara was a habitable savanna rather than the current desert. Although sources vary considerably, the earliest pieces of art are presumed to be 12,000 years old. The vast majority date to the ninth and tenth millennia BP or younger, according to OSL dating of associated sediments. The art was dated by gathering small fragments of the painted panels that had dried out and flaked off before being buried. Among the 15,000 engravings so far identified, the subjects depicted are large wild animals including antelopes and crocodiles, cattle herds, and humans who engage in activities such as hunting and dancing.  These paintings are some of the earliest by Central Saharan artists, and occur in the largest concentration at Tassili. Although Algeria is relatively close to the Iberian Peninsula, the rock art of Tassili n'Ajjer evolved separately from that of the European tradition. According to UNESCO, "The exceptional density of paintings and engravings...have made Tassili world famous."
Similar to other Saharan sites with rock art, Tassili can be separated into five distinct traditions: Archaic (10,000 to 7500 BCE), Round Head (7550 to 5050 BCE), Bovidian or Pastoral (4500 to 4000 BCE), Horse (from 2000 BCE and 50 CE), and Camel (1000 BCE and onward).
The Archaic period consists primarily of wild animals that lived in the Sahara during the Early Holocene. These works are attributed to hunter-gather peoples, consisting of only etchings. Images are primarily of larger animals, depicted in a naturalistic manner, with the occasional geometric pattern and the human figure. Usually, the humans and animals are depicted within the context of a hunting scene.
The Round Head Period is associated with specific stylistic choices depicting humanoid forms and is well separated from the Archaic tradition even though hunter-gatherers were the artists for both. The art consists mainly of paintings, with some of the oldest and largest exposed rock paintings in Africa; one human figure stands over five meters and another at three and a half meters. The unique depiction of floating figures with round, featureless heads and formless bodies appear to be floating on the rock surface, hence the "Round Head" label. The occurrence of these paintings and motifs are concentrated in specific locations on the plateau, implying that these sites were the center of ritual, rites, and ceremonies. Most animals shown are mouflon and antelope, usually in static positions that do not appear to be part of a hunting scene.
The Bovidian/Pastoral period correlates with the arrival of domesticated cattle into the Sahara and the gradual shift to mobile pastoralism. There is a notable and visual difference between the Pastoral period and the earlier two periods, coinciding with the aridification of the Sahara. There is increased stylistic variation, implying the movement of different cultural groups within the area. Domesticated animals such as cattle, sheep, goats, and dogs are depicted, paralleling the zooarchaeological record of the area. The scenes reference diversified communities of herders, hunters with bows, as well as women and children, and imply a growing stratification of society based on property.
The following Horse traditions correspond with the complete desertification of the Sahara and the requirement for new travel methods. The arrival of horses, horse-drawn chariots, and riders are depicted, often in mid-gallop, and is associated more with hunting than warfare. Inscriptions of Libyan-Berber script, used by ancestral Berber peoples, appear next to the images, however, the text is completely indecipherable.
The last period is defined by the appearance of camels, which replaced donkeys and cattle as the main mode of transportation across the Sahara. The arrival of camels coincides with the development of long-distance trade routes used by caravans to transport salt, goods, and enslaved people across the Sahara. Men, both mounted and unmounted, with shields, spears, and swords are present. Animals including cows and goats are included, but wild animals were crudely rendered.
Although these periods are successive the timeframes are flexible and are consistently being reconstructed by archaeologists as technology and interpretation develop. The art had been dated by archaeologists who gathered fallen fragments and debris from the rock face.

A notable piece common in academic writing is the "Running Horned Woman," also known as the "Horned Goddess," from the round head period. The image depicts a female figure with horns in midstride; dots adorn her torso and limbs, and she is dressed in fringed armbands, a skirt, leg bands, and anklets. According to Arisika Razak, Tassili's Horned Goddess is an early example of the "African Sacred Feminine." Her femininity, fertility, and connection to nature are emphasized while the Neolithic artist superimposes the figure onto smaller, older figures. The use of bull horns is a common theme in later round head paintings, which reflects the steady integration of domesticated cattle into Saharan daily life. Cattle imagery, specifically that of bulls,  became a central theme in not only at Tassili, but at other nearby sites in Libya.

Fungoid rock art
In 1989, the psychedelics researcher Giorgio Samorini proposed the theory that the fungoid-like paintings in the caves of Tassili are proof of the relationship between humans and psychedelics in the ancient populations of the Sahara, when it was still a verdant land:

One of the most important scenes is to be found in the Tin-Tazarift rock art site, at Tassili, in which we find a series of masked figures in line and hieratically dressed or dressed as dancers surrounded by long and lively festoons of geometrical designs of different kinds... Each dancer holds a mushroom-like object in the right hand and, even more surprising, two parallel lines come out of this object to reach the central part of the head of the dancer, the area of the roots of the two horns. This double line could signify an indirect association or non-material fluid passing from the object held in the right hand and the mind. This interpretation would coincide with the mushroom interpretation if we bear in mind the universal mental value induced by hallucinogenic mushrooms and vegetals, which is often of a mystical and spiritual nature (Dobkin de Rios, 1984:194). It would seem that these lines – in themselves an ideogram that represents something non-material in ancient art – represent the effect that the mushroom has on the human mind... In a shelter in Tin – Abouteka, in Tassili, there is a motif appearing at least twice that associates mushrooms and fish; a unique association of symbols among ethno-mycological cultures... Two mushrooms are depicted opposite each other, in a perpendicular position about the fish motif and near the tail. Not far from here, above, we find other fish which are similar to the aforementioned, but without the side-mushrooms.
This theory was reused by Terence McKenna in his 1992 book Food of the Gods, hypothesizing that the Neolithic culture that inhabited the site used psilocybin mushrooms as part of its religious ritual life, citing rock paintings showing persons holding mushroom-like objects in their hands, as well as mushrooms growing from their bodies. For Henri Lhote, who discovered the Tassili caves in the late 1950s, these were obviously secret sanctuaries.
The painting that best supports the mushroom hypothesis is the Tassili mushroom figure Matalem-Amazar where the body of the represented shaman is covered with mushrooms. According to Earl Lee in his book From the Bodies of the Gods: Psychoactive Plants and the Cults of the Dead (2012), this imagery refers to an ancient episode where a "mushroom shaman" was buried while fully clothed and when unearthed sometime later, tiny mushrooms would be growing on the clothes. Earl Lee considered the mushroom paintings at Tassili fairly realistic.
According to Brian Akers, writer for the Mushroom journal, the fungoid rock art in Tassili does not resemble the representations of the Psilocybe hispanica in the Selva Pascuala caves (2015), and he doesn't consider it realistic.

In popular culture
Tassili is the recording location and the title of a 2011 album by the Tuareg band Tinariwen.
Tassili Plain is a track on the 1994 album Natural Wonders of the World in Dub by dub group Zion Train.
In Fate/Extella: The Umbral Star, the character Altera is actually a shattered form of the deity known as Sefar, which is based on one of the drawings made in the cave group and is known in the story also as The White Titan of Tassili n'Ajjer

Gallery
The rock engravings of Tin-Taghirt
The Tin-Taghirt site is located in the Tassili n'Ajjer between the cities of Dider and Iherir.

See also
List of Stone Age art
List of cultural assets of Algeria
Sebiba

Notes
External links
Video
The natural arches of the Tassili n'Ajjer
Flore et faune du Tassili n’Ajjer, 2023, French, illustrated. Part 1: Presentation, landscape, fauna [13],
Flore et faune du Tassili n’Ajjer, part 2: Flora [14]
Pictures of the Saharan cypress (Cupressus dupreziana) iNaturalist
Pictures of the Saharan myrtle (Myrtus nivellei) iNaturalist

References
Further reading
Bahn, Paul G. (1998) The Cambridge Illustrated History of Prehistoric Art Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Bradley, R (2000) An archaeology of natural places London, Routledge.
Bruce-Lockhart, J and Wright, J (2000) Difficult and Dangerous Roads: Hugh Clapperton's Travels in the Sahara and Fezzan 1822-1825
Chippindale, Chris and Tacon, S-C (eds) (1998) The Archaeology of Rock Art Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Clottes, J. (2002): World Rock Art. Los Angeles: Getty Publications.
Coulson, D, and Campbell, Alec (2001) African Rock Art: Paintings and Engravings on Stone New York, Harry N Abrams.
Frison-Roche, Roger  (1965) Carnets Sahariens Paris, Flammarion
Holl, Augustin F.C. (2004) Saharan Rock Art, Archaeology of Tassilian Pastoralist Icongraphy
Lajoux, Jean-Dominique (1977) Tassili n'Ajjer: Art Rupestre du Sahara Préhistorique Paris, Le Chêne.
Lajoux, Jean-Dominique (1962), Merveilles du Tassili n'Ajjer (The rock paintings of Tassili in translation), Le Chêne, Paris.
Le Quellec, J-L (1998) Art Rupestre et Prehistoire du Sahara. Le Messak Libyen Paris: Editions Payot et Rivages, Bibliothèque Scientifique Payot.
Lhote, Henri (1959, reprinted 1973) The Search for the Tassili Frescoes: The story of the prehistoric rock-paintings of the Sahara London.
Lhote, Henri (1958, 1973, 1992, 2006) À la découverte des fresques du Tassili, Arthaud, Paris.
Mattingly, D (ed) (forthcoming) The archaeology of the Fezzan.
Muzzolini, A (1997) "Saharan Rock Art", in Vogel, J O (ed) Encyclopedia of Precolonial Africa Walnut Creek: 347–353.
Van Albada, A. and Van Albada, A.-M. (2000): La Montagne des Hommes-Chiens: Art Rupestre du Messak Lybien Paris, Seuil.
Whitley, D S (ed) (2001) Handbook of Rock Art Research New York: Altamira Press.



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: TLEMCEN
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:00:57
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 2,054
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tlemcen
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tlemcen (; Arabic: تِلِمْسَان, romanized: Tilimsân) is the second-largest city in northwestern Algeria after Oran and is the capital of Tlemcen Province. The city has developed leather, carpet, and textile industries, which it exports through the port of Rachgoun. It had a population of 140,158, as of the 2008 census.
A major centre of the Central Maghreb, the city is a mix of Arab, Berber, 'Āndalusī, Ottoman, and Western influences. From this mosaic of influences, the city derives the title of capital of Andalusian art in Algeria. Various titles are attributed to the city including "the Pearl of the Maghreb", "the African Granada" and "the Medina of the West".

Etymology
The name Tlemcen (Tilimsân) was given by the Zayyanid King Yaghmurasen ibn Zyan. One possible etymology is that it comes from a Berber word tilmas 'spring, water-hole', or from the combination of the Berber words tala 'fountain', the preposition m-, and sân 'two', thus meaning 'two fountains'. Another proposed etymology is from the Zanata words talam 'junction' and sân 'two', referring to the town's geographic position, which links the desert regions to the south with the mountainous regions to the north.

History
Prehistory
The areas surrounding Tlemcen were inhabited during the Neolithic period, as evidenced by the discovery of polished axes in the caves of Boudghene by Gustave-Marie Bleicher in 1875.
There are three important prehistoric sites in the region: lake Karar, located one kilometer south of Remchi; the rock shelters of Mouilah, 5 km north of Maghnia; and the deposit called "d'Ouzidan", 2 km west of Aïn El Hout. The shelters found at the Mouilah and Boudghene show evidence of long periods of pre-historic human habitation.

Antiquity
In AD 17, Tacfarinas led the Gaetuli to revolt against the Romans.
Tlemcen became a military outpost of Ancient Rome in the 2nd century CE under the name of Pomaria. It was then an important city in the North Africa see of the Roman Catholic Church, where it was the center of a diocese. Its bishop, Victor, was a prominent representative at the Council of Carthage (411), and its bishop Honoratus was exiled in 484 by the Vandal king Huneric for denying Arianism.
It was a center of a large Christian population for many centuries after the city's Arab conquest in 708 AD.

Early Islamic period
In the later eighth century and the ninth century, the city became a Kingdom of Banu Ifran with a Sufri Kharijite orientation. These same Berber Kharijis also began to develop various small Saharan oases and to link them into regular trans-Saharan caravan routes terminating at Tlemcen, beginning a process that would determine Tlemcen's historical role for almost all of the next millennium. In the late 8th century a settlement named Agadir existed on the site of former Roman Pomaria. Idris I founded a congregational mosque here, the Great Mosque of Agadir, circa 790 (no longer extant).
In 1081 or 1082 the Almoravid leader Yusuf ibn Tashfin founded the city of Tagrart ("encampment" in Berber language), just west of Agadir. The fusion of the two settlements of Tagrart and Agadir over time became what is now Tlemcen. At the same time as he founded Tagrart, Ibn Tashfin founded its congregational mosque, known today as the Great Mosque of Tlemcen, which was expanded in 1126 by his son and successor 'Ali Ibn Yusuf. He built a governor's residence next to it, known after as the Qasr al-Qadim ("Old Palace").
In the book Al-Istibsar fi 'agaib al-Amsar, written in the late 12th century, the author wrote:
“It is a great and ancient city with numerous timeless ruins, indicating that it was once the capital of past nations. It lies at the foot of a mountain, most of whose trees are walnut. The city once had water brought in by the works of early civilizations from a spring called Burit, located six miles away. A large river, known as Satafsaif, flows through it. Tlemcen was the capital of the Zanata [tribe] kingdom and was surrounded by many tribes, both from Zanata and other Berber groups. It is a land of great fertility, with abundant resources, low prices, and plentiful blessings. The city governs many villages, continuous settlements, and numerous towns under its administration. Adjacent to Tlemcen, there is a fortified citadel rich in fruit-bearing trees and abundant in water and rivers. Connected to it is Mount Tawraniya, a vast, inhabited mountain filled with villages and continuous settlements.”
Control of the region passed from the Almoravids to the Almohad Caliphate in the mid-twelfth century. After its conquest, the Almohad ruler 'Abd al-Mu'min surrounded the city with a wall in 1145 and built a new citadel. However, in the early thirteenth century, 'Abdallah ibn Ghaniya attempted to restore Almoravid control of the Maghreb. In about 1209, the region around Tlemcen was devastated by retreating Almoravid forces, not long before their final defeat by the Almohads at the Battle of Jebel Nafusa in 1210. Despite the destruction of Tlemcen's already-feeble agricultural base, Tlemcen rose to prominence as a major trading and administrative center in the region under the ensuing reign of the Almohads.

Zayyanid period
After the end of Almohad rule in the 1230s, Tlemcen became the capital of one of the three successor states, the Zayyanid Kingdom of Tlemcen (1236–1554). The Zayyanid ruler Yaghmurasen Ibn Zyan succeeded in merging Agadir and Tagrart into a single city and gave it the name Tlemcen. Initially, Yagmurasen resided in the Qasr al-Qadim but he soon moved the seat of power to a new citadel, the Mechouar, towards the mid 13th century. The city was thereafter ruled for centuries by successive Zayyanid sultans. During this era it was one of the most important economic and cultural centers in the region, alongside other political capitals like Fez, Tunis, and Granada. During the Middle Ages, Tlemcen not only served as a trading city connecting the "coastal" route across the Maghreb with the trans-Saharan caravan routes, but also housed a European trading center, or funduk which connected African and European merchants. African gold arrived in Tlemcen from south of the Sahara through Sijilmasa or Taghaza and entered European hands. Consequently, Tlemcen was partially integrated into the European financial system. For example, Genoese bills of exchange circulated there, at least among merchants not subject to (or not deterred by) religious prohibitions.
At the peak of its success in the first half of the fourteenth century, Tlemcen was a city of perhaps 40,000 inhabitants. It housed several well-known madrasas and numerous wealthy religious foundations, and became the principal centers of culture in the central Maghreb. The Zayyanids were the first to sponsor of the construction of madrasas in this part of the Maghreb, and among the most famous in Tlemcen was the Tashfiniya Madrasa founded by Abu Tashfin I (r. 1318–1337). At the souk around the Great Mosque, merchants sold woolen fabrics and rugs from the East, slaves and gold from across the Sahara, local earthenware and leather goods, and a variety of Mediterranean maritime goods "redirected" to Tlemcen by corsairs—in addition to imported European goods available at the funduk. Merchant houses based in Tlemcen, such as the al-Makkari, maintained regular branch offices in Mali and the Sudan.
Later in the fourteenth century, the city twice fell under the rule of the Marinid sultan, Abu al-Hasan Ali (1337–1348) and his son Abu 'Inan. Both times the Marinids found that they were unable to hold the region against local resistance. Nevertheless, these episodes appear to have marked the beginning of the end. Over the following two centuries, Zayyanid Tlemcen was intermittently a vassal of Ifriqiya (then governed by the Hafsid dynasty), Maghrib al-Aqsa (then governed by the Marinid dynasty), or Aragon. When the Spanish took the city of Oran from the Zayyanids in 1509, continuous pressure from the Berbers prompted the Spanish to start a campaign against Tlemcen in 1543, which ended in the capture of the city and in the installation of a vassal king on the throne.
The ruler of Tlemcen is reported to have been advised by a Jewish viceroy named Abraham, who, in the time of the Inquisition of Torquemada, opened the gates of Tlemcen to Jewish and Muslim refugees fleeing Spain. Abraham is said to have supported them with his own money and with the tolerance of the king of Tlemcen.

Later years
In 1551, Tlemcen came under Ottoman rule after the Campaign of Tlemcen. Tlemcen and the Algerian provinces regained effective independence in their own affairs in 1671, although Tlemcen was no longer a government seat as before. The Spanish were evicted from Oran in 1792, but thirty years later, they were replaced by the French, who seized Algiers. A French fleet bombarded Algiers in 1830, at which point the dey capitulated to French colonial rule; a broad coalition of natives continued to resist, coordinated loosely at Tlemcen.
Tlemcen was a vacation spot and retreat for French settlers in Algeria, who found it far more temperate than Oran or Algiers. The city adapted and became more cosmopolitan, with a unique outlook on art and culture, and its architecture and urban life evolved to accommodate this new sense. In the independence movements of the mid-twentieth century, it was relatively quiet, reflecting the city's sense of aloofness from the turbulence of Algiers. In 1943 Tlemcen was little more than a railway halt. On January 13 a British and American train patrol engaged in a skirmish with the retreating troops of the Afrika Korps. As the US Army marched eastwards from its Moroccan landing grounds, the British 8th Army drove west, forcing the Germans into an evacuation pocket at Tunis. Between 1942–1943, before embarking for Italy, the US Army Medical Corps established two fixed hospitals at Tlemcen: 9th Evacuation (as station), 12–26 December 1942. Seven hundred and fifty beds and 32d Station, 28 February – 28 November 1943, 500 beds.
The most important place for pilgrimage of all religions into Tlemcen was the Jewish cemetery on the outskirts of town. Up to 10,000 people worldwide made the journey to the site. Nonetheless, despite religious freedoms, their community had never numbered more than 5,000–6,000 in the 20th century, and discriminatory laws of had been in force since 1881. After Algerian independence in 1962, most of the small Jewish population evacuated to metropolitan France. The Berber tribes historically professed Judaism. During the colonial period they served in the French Army. French Jews of the Alliance Israélite Universelle paid for a local Jewish school, which closed in 1934, perhaps owing to the rise of Fascism. In 2009 Jordanian sources reported that the Algerian government intended to restore the damaged Jewish tombs at the historic cemetery.

Climate
Tlemcen has a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification BSh).

Culture
Its centuries of rich history and culture have made the city a center of a unique blend of music and art. Its textiles and handcrafts, its elegant display of Andalusi culture, and its cool climate in the mountains have made it an important center of tourism in Algeria. It is home to a tomb—that of Sidi Boumédiène, whose tomb adjoins a mosque. The Great Mosque of Tlemcen was completed in 1136 and is said to be the most remarkable remaining example of Almoravid architecture.

Media
Newspapers
Le Petit Tlemcenien, French language weekly (1882)

Notable people
Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari (1591–1632), historian
Eugénie Buffet (1866–1934), French singer
Messali Hadj (1898–1974), nationalist politician
Abdelhalim Hemche (1908–1979), painter
Paul Bénichou (1908–2001), French writer and historian
Mohammed Dib (1920–2003), writer
Benaouda Benzerdjeb (1921–1956), physician and martyr
Bachir Yellès (1921–2022), painter
Sid Ahmed Inal (born 1931), activist
Mourad Medelci (1943–2019), politician
Rachid Baba Ahmed (1946–1995), singer and composer
Sami Naïr (born 1946), political philosopher
Latifa Ben Mansour (born 1950), writer
Patrick Bruel (born 1959), French actor and singer
Mohamed Zaoui (born 1960), boxer
Kheireddine Kherris (born 1973), international footballer
Anwar Boudjakdji (born 1976), international footballer
Kamel Habri (born 1976), international footballer

International relations
Twin towns — sister cities
Tlemcen is twinned with:

See also
WA Tlemcen
Tlemcen National Park
El-Ourit Waterfalls

References
External links

Tlemcen, non official website
Abou Bakr Belkaid University of Tlemcen
Free/Open Source Community of Tlemcen
Unofficial portrait of this city
Cana, Frank Richardson (1911). "Tlemçen" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). pp. 1034–1035.
Pétridès, Sophron (1911). "Pomaria" . Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 12.
Tlemcen in the region Oran, non official website



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: MANSOURAH
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: historical_site | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:01:05
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,037
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mansoura,_Egypt
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mansoura (Arabic: المنصورة; Al Manṣūra, IPA: [el.mɑnˈsˤuːɾɑ], rural: [el.mænˈsˤuːɾe]) is a city in Egypt located on the eastern bank of the Damietta branch of the Nile river. The city is the capital of the Dakahlia Governorate and has an estimated population of 632,330 as of 2023.

Etymology
Mansoura in Arabic means "victorious". The city is named after the El Mansoura Battle (1250) against Louis IX of France during the Seventh Crusade.

History
Mansoura was established in 1219 by al-Kamil of the Ayyubid dynasty upon a Phatmetic branch of the Nile on a place of several older villages like Al-Bishtamir (Arabic: البشطمير) and Kafr al-Badamas (Arabic: كفر البدماص, from Ancient Greek: ποταμός, "river, canal"). After the Egyptians defeated the Crusaders during the Seventh Crusade, it was named Mansoura (aka. "The Victorious").
In the Seventh Crusade, the Capetians were defeated and put to flight; between fifteen and thirty thousand of their men fell on the battlefield. Louis IX of France was captured in the main Battle of Fariskur, and confined in the house of Ibrahim Ibn Lokman, secretary of the sultan, and under the guard of the eunuch Sobih. The king's brother was imprisoned in the same house. The sultan provided for their sustenance. The house of Ibrahim Ibn Lokman is now the only museum in Mansoura. It is open to the public and houses articles that used to belong to the French monarch, including his personal thirteenth century toilet.
The Mansoura Air Battle on October 14, 1973, occurred during the Yom Kippur War. Israeli Air Force fighters attacking Egyptian air bases were intercepted by the Egyptian Air Force. On that day, 160 jet fighters, most belonging to Israel, battled for 53 minutes over Mansoura. The Egyptian army claimed that despite the numerical and qualitative superiority of the Israeli warplanes, 17 Israeli planes were downed. (2 according to the Israelis), while the rest retreated. Egypt announced the loss of six planes, only three of which fell to Israeli fire. The Egyptian government subsequently changed the country's "Air Force Day" from November 2 to October 14, to commemorate the Mansoura Air Battle.

Geography
Location
Mansoura lies on the east bank of the Damietta branch of the Nile, in the Delta region. Mansoura is about 120 km northeast of Cairo. Across from the city, on the opposite bank of the Nile, is the town of Talkha.

Climate
Köppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as hot desert (BWh).

Culture
The Egyptian Arabic dialect spoken by Mansoura's population is a northern Egyptian Arabic dialect, with noticeable influences from the city's surrounding rural villages, each of which has contributed to the city's population over the years. There are some similarities to Alexandrian Egyptian Arabic in some aspects of pronunciation.
Mansoura National Museum used to be Dar Ibn Lockman, the house where Louis IX was imprisoned in 1250 during the Seventh Crusade. Displayed in the museum are the suits of mail and swords of the crusaders, as well as a collection of maps. Huge paintings depict the Battle of Mansoura.
The Mansoura branch of the National Library was inaugurated in 2008 as the Mansoura Misr Library.
Mansoura is famous for its architectural style, especially the Shinnawi Palace (after Mohamed Bek El-Shinnawi, a member of the Wafd Party). It was built by an Italian architect in 1928. The mosque of El-Saleh Ayoub El-Kebir is one of the most important in Mansoura. It was built by a loyal servant of the Sultan and is located in Al-Sagha Street that separates "Old Mansoura" from the modern city.
Like Cairo, Alexandria and Port Said, Mansoura was home to a flourishing Greek community until the Nasser era, when many were forced to leave. Many of the older and best established shops and businesses around the city still bear their original Greek names. Mansoura also had a small Italian population living in the city too. The first Old English school in the city was established on the site of the old Greek school in the Toriel area, one of the traditionally relatively affluent residential districts of the city.

Education
The University of Mansoura was founded in 1962, initially as a branch of Cairo University. The Urology and Nephrology center of Mansoura University founded by Prof Mohammed Ghonem is considered to be the best kidney center in the Middle East and Africa.
Mansoura has a sports stadium (Mansoura Stadium) which is home to its football team.

Clubs (Sport)
Gezert Elward Sport Club: It is located directly on the Nile and has tennis courts, swimming, gymnastics, squash and social club. Recently, the gymnastics team participated under the seven-year club in the Republic Championship and received 2 gold medals 13 silver and 1 bronze and 1 participation.
Mansoura Sports Club: It has an official football field.
Mansoura Sports Stadium: It has an official football field, swimming pool, social club and many sports facilities.
The Olympic Village (Mansoura University Stadium): It covers an area of 15 acres and is open to university students, faculty members and those wishing to play abroad in individual and group games.
Nile Club: The club was established by decision of the University Council in its session held on 12/27/1993, provided that it has financial, administrative and technical resignation, and it is located in Rose Island in the lower walkway in Mansoura. The club is a cultural, social, sports and recreational center for faculty members, their assistants, and university staff.

Notable people
Kareem Abu-Elmagd, Egyptian-American organ transplant surgeon
Ahmed El-Ghandour (Da7ee7), YouTuber and educator
Adel Emam, actor
Mohamed Ghoneim, urologist
Faten Hamama, actress
Ahmed Hamdi, engineer
Ahmed Hamed, Olympic pentathlete
Anis Mansour; writer
Hassan El-Imam, film director, titled Box-office King
Gad al-Haq Ali Gad al-Haq, Grand Imam of Al-Azhar from 1982 to 1996; public figure and Islamic scholar
Pope Tawadros II, Pope of Alexandria & Patriarch of All Africa on the Holy Apostolic See of Saint Mark the Evangelist of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria
Ibrahim Salah; footballer
Hesham Sallam, paleontologist
Soheir Zaki, dancer

See also
List of cities and towns in Egypt
Central Library - Mansoura University Archived 2023-06-12 at the Wayback Machine

References
External links
"Mansura" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 17 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 602.

http://www.dakahliya.gov.eg/Dakhlya/PDF_Files_/Dr_Ayman.pdf

(in Arabic) Official website Archived 2009-09-01 at the Wayback Machine



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: GREAT MOSQUE OF TLEMCEN
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: religious_site | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:01:13
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,479
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Mosque_of_Tlemcen
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Great Mosque of Tlemcen (Arabic: الجامع الكبير لتلمسان, romanized: el-Jemaa el-Kebir litilimcen) is a mosque in Tlemcen, Algeria. It was founded and first built in 1082 CE, and modified and embellished several times afterwards. It is considered one of the most important examples of architecture under the Almoravid dynasty. Major extensions to the mosque building and the construction of the minaret were completed during the Zayyanid era.

History
The mosque was founded by the Almoravid emir Yusuf ibn Tashfin in 1082 when he founded the city of Tagrart (present-day Tlemcen), an extension of the earlier Idrisid-era city of Agadir. However, the mosque was renovated and decorated by his son and successor, Ali ibn Yusuf. Among other things, the celebrated dome near the mosque's mihrab dates from this renovation, which an inscription below the dome indicates was completed in 1136 CE. Curiously, however, the actual name of the emir has been erased from the inscription, possibly by the Almohads who ruled the city after the Almoravids. It is also believed that the old Almoravid palace of the city, the Qasr al-Qadima or Qasr al-Bali ("Old Palace"), directly adjoined the mosque on its northwestern side.
In 1236 CE Sultan Yaghmorasan (r. 1236–1283), the founder of the Abdalwadid dynasty of Tlemcen, added the mosque's minaret near its courtyard. Yaghmorasan also modified the areas around the courtyard and extended the mosque structure northwards. The original mosque likely had a larger rectangular courtyard whose position and proportions would have been similar to the courtyards of earlier mosques in Al-Andalus, whereas Yaghmorasan's modifications left the mosque with a square courtyard whose middle axis is no longer aligned with the middle axis of the mosque. The less ornate dome in the middle of the prayer hall today probably also dates from this time.
Next to the mosque there used to be an Islamic court (Mahkama) and an Islamic university. In 1875, during French colonial control, the mosque was declared, along with other major monuments of the city, a "Historic Monument" and placed under certain protective measures. Around the same time, French architects carried out the first modern repairs, restorations, and studies of the mosque.

Architecture
The floor plan of the mosque is approximately 50 by 60 metres (160 by 200 feet) deep. Although the mosque is designed for a typical rectangular floor plan, the northwestern corner of the mosque is truncated because of the original presence of a palace on this side. Like most North African mosques, its has a hypostyle prayer hall and an internal courtyard (sahn).
The prayer hall is divided into 13 naves or aisles by 12 rows of horseshoe arches running perpendicular to the southeastern qibla wall. Two transverse rows of arches – one on the south side of the courtyard and another about halfway between the courtyard and the qibla wall – also feature polylobed arches, and another polylobed arch runs transversally before the bay in front of the mihrab (niche symbolizing the direction of prayer).

The central aisle in front of the mihrab is wider than the other aisles. At this aisle's middle point, in front of the second row of transverse arches, is an ornamental ribbed dome, likely added by Yaghmorasan in the 13th century. Another ornamental dome, older and more intricate, covers the bay in front of the mihrab. Some of the arch pillars near the mihrab also feature marble columns. The mihrab itself is an alcove in the wall which opens through a horseshoe arch framed by intricate carved stucco decoration. The overall design of the mihrab follows the architectural precedents seen in the mihrab of the Great Mosque of Cordoba.
The intricate ribbed dome in front of the mihrab is considered a highlight of Almoravid architecture and dates to the renovation of Ali ibn Yusuf. The structure of the dome is strictly ornamental, consisting of multiple ribs or intersecting arches forming a twelve-pointed star pattern. It is also partly see-through, allowing some outside light to filter through a screen of pierced and carved arabesque and openwork decoration that fills the spaces between the ribs. The area below this dome, the maqsura, was once separated from the rest of the mosque by a richly-crafted wooden lattice screen. The screen has since been moved to the Museum of Art and History in Tlemcen. It bears an inscription dating it to 1138, also around the time of Ali ibn Yusuf's renovation.
The original Almoravid mosque presumably had no minaret, as the current minaret was only added in 1236 by Yaghmorasan. The minaret is made of brick and has a typical square floor plan, measuring 6.3 metres (21 feet) per side. It has a two-tiered shaft: the main shaft is 26.2 metres (86 feet) tall and a secondary lantern tower above this brings the total height to 29.15 metres (95.6 feet) meters. The four facades of the main shaft of the minaret are decorated with carved panels of sebka motifs springing from engaged columns below. An odd detail is the fact that the decorative panel on the courtyard side is uneven: the space between the engaged columns on the left is wider than the others, causing an uneven spacing within the sebka pattern above it as well. The top of the minaret was formerly crowned with an Arabic inscription made in copper, the pieces of which were moved to a local museum before 1903.

Chandelier
Suspended from the ribbed dome in the center of the prayer hall is a large circular chandelier. By popular tradition, its origin is attributed to a donation by Yaghmorasan in the 13th century. William and Georges Marçais speculated that it could be a work of Andalusi origin. Archeologist Lucien Golvin suggested that it was of slightly later date, possibly a spoil from the abandoned Marinid mosque of al-Mansura (beginning of the 14th century), where Ibn Marzuq described a chandelier that he had made and that had been moved to the Great Mosque of Tlemcen. The largest and lowest part of the chandelier had a circumference of around 8 metres (26 ft) and was made of cedar wood clad with sheets of copper that were pierced with floral motifs. In the 19th century, the chandelier had fallen into disrepair. Its remains were moved to a local museum and a replacement inside the mosque was created in the 20th century by Mohammed ben Kalfate, a metalworker and artisan from Tlemcen.

Influences and architectural legacy
Antonio Almagro, in an analysis of the mosque's architecture, has argued that its original shape and proportions were similar to those of major mosques in Al-Andalus such as the Great Mosque of Cordoba but that this parallel is now somewhat obscured by later modifications to the mosque. The celebrated ornamental dome and elaborate decoration added to the mosque by Ali ibn Yusuf, however, is considered exceptional and an important testimony of Almoravid craftsmanship which has rarely survived elsewhere. The design of the mosque's ornamental dome traces its origins to the 10th-century ribbed domes of the Great Mosque of Cordoba and subsequent domes in Al-Andalus, and in turn it inspired similar ornate domes in the Great Mosque of Fes el-Jdid and the Great Mosque of Taza, both built in the later Marinid period. Almagro and others see further parallels between the mosque's features and the decorative features found in the architecture of the Taifas period in Al-Andalus, notably with the Aljaferia palace of Zaragoza. Indeed, there are historical reports of a former room (now vanished) in the Aljaferia whose vaulted ceiling had openwork decoration reminiscent of the mosque's openwork dome, although the remains of decoration in the palace today suggest it was less delicate and subtle than the mosque's dome.
Jonathan Bloom remarks that the evidence simply suggests that the Almoravids, especially at the height of their power and culture under Ali ibn Yusuf, could afford to import craftsmen from Al-Andalus to work on their new monuments in North Africa. The increased ornamental complexity and sophistication of subsequent Maghrebi architecture, influenced by Andalusi architecture, is thus in part due to this Almoravid patronage. Bloom also notes that although we know the Almoravids built many other mosques, few examples of their architecture have survived, and therefore the Great Mosque of Tlemcen may not have been as "original" in its time as it appears now and its exceptional features today may have existed in other mosques that have now disappeared. The Almoravid expansion of the Qarawiyyin Mosque, for example, shows even more elaborate decoration overall than the Tlemcen mosque, although using different elements.

See also
Islam in Algeria
List of mosques in Algeria
History of medieval Arabic and Western European domes

References
External links
 Media related to Great Mosque of Tlemcen at Wikimedia Commons

"Djama'a al-Kebir (Great Mosque)" (Includes pictures of the interior and the floor plan). MWNF (Museum With No Frontiers), Discover Islamic Art.
"Great Mosque of Tlemcen" (Includes pictures of the interior). ArchNet.



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: CONSTANTINE ALGERIA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:01:21
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,493
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constantine,_Algeria
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Constantine (Arabic: قسنطينة, romanized: Qusanṭīnah), also spelled Qacentina or Kasantina, is the capital of Constantine Province in northeastern Algeria. During Roman times it was called Cirta and was renamed "Constantina" in honour of Emperor Constantine the Great. Located somewhat inland, Constantine is about 80 kilometres (50 miles) from the Mediterranean coast, on the banks of the Rhumel River.
Constantine is regarded as the capital of eastern Algeria and the commercial centre of its region and has a population of about 450,000 (938,475 with the agglomeration), making it the third largest city in the country after Algiers and Oran. There are several museums and historical sites located around the city. Constantine is often referred to as the "City of Bridges" because of the numerous picturesque bridges connecting the various hills, valleys, and ravines that the city is built on and around.
Constantine was named the Arab Capital of Culture in 2015.

History
Ancient history
In antiquity, the city was originally called Cirta and served as the capital of the Berber kingdom of Numidia. In 112 BC, the city was the capital of the Numidian king Jugurtha, who defeated his half-brother Adherbal. The city later served as the base for Roman generals Quintus Caecilius Metellus Numidicus and Gaius Marius in their war against Jugurtha. Later, with the removal of King Juba I and the remaining supporters of Pompey in Africa (c. 46), Julius Caesar gave special rights to the citizens of Cirta, now known as Colonia Sittlanorum.
In 311 AD, during the civil war between emperor Maxentius and usurper Domitius Alexander (a former governor of Africa), the city was destroyed. Rebuilt in 313 AD, it was subsequently named in Latin as "Colonia Constantiniana" or "Constantina", after emperor Constantine the Great, who had defeated Maxentius. During Roman rule, the city exported wheat and was the only population center that lay on both of the Roman roads paved in ancient Algeria. Captured by the Vandals in 432, Constantine returned to the Byzantine Exarchate of Africa from 534 to 697. Following the Arab conquest of the city in the 8th century, it became known as Qacentina. The city was a part of the wider region of Ifriqiya.

Modern history
The city recovered in the 12th century and under Almohad and Hafsid rule it was again a prosperous market, with links to Pisa, Genoa and Venice. After taking it from the Hafsids in 1529 it was intermittently part of Ottoman Empire, ruled by a Turkish bey (governor) subordinate to the dey of Algiers. Salah Bey, who ruled the city in 1770–1792, greatly embellished it and built much of the Muslim architecture still visible today. During the Ottoman reign of Constantine, merchants traded a variety of goods such as; agricultural products, animals, embroidered textiles, leather, precious metals, swords, and pistols.

In 1826 the last bey, Ahmed Bey ben Mohamed Chérif, became the new head of state. He led a fierce resistance against French forces, which invaded Algeria four years later. By 13 October 1837, the territory was captured by France, and from 1848 on until 1962 it was the centre of the Constantine Département. In 1880, while working in the military hospital in Constantine, Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran discovered that the cause of malaria is a protozoan. He observed the parasites in a blood smear taken from a soldier who had just died of malaria. For this, he received the 1907 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine. This was the first time that protozoa were shown to be a cause of disease. His work helped inspire researchers and veterinarians today to try to find a cure for malaria in animals.
In 1934, Muslim anti-Jewish riots, the 1934 Constantine Pogrom, caused the death of 23 local Jews and 3 local Muslims, 81 people were injured on both sides of the conflict.
During World War II, during the campaign in North Africa (1942–43), Allied forces used Constantine and the nearby cities of Sétif and Bone as operational bases.

Geography
Constantine is situated on a plateau at an elevation 640 metres (2,100 ft) above sea level. The city is framed by a deep ravine and has a dramatic appearance. The city is very picturesque with a number of bridges over Rhumel River and a viaduct crossing the ravine. The ravine is crossed by seven bridges, including Sidi M'Cid bridge. Constantine is the railhead of a prosperous and diverse agricultural area. It is also a centre of the grain trade and has flour mills, a tractor factory, and industries producing textiles, wool, linen and leather goods. Algeria and Tunisia serve as its markets.

Climate
Constantine has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification Csa), with hot, dry summers and mild, moist winters.

Main sights
The city is framed by a deep ravine and has a dramatic appearance. In 1911, Baedeker described it as "resembling the Kasba of Algiers, the picturesque charm of which has so far been marred by the construction of but a few new streets."

El Bey Mosque built in 1703 also known by its post colonial name Souq El Ghezal Mosque.
Great Mosque of Constantine historical mosque built in 1136.
Cirta Museum, previously Gustave Mercier Museum (displays ancient and modern Algerian art)
Abd al Hamid Ben Badis Mosque
The Casbah (Kasbah) known locally by the name of Swika
Emir Abdelkader University and Mosque
Soumma Mausoleum
Massinissa's Mausoleum
Municipal Library of Constantine
Ahmed Bey Palace
Ruins of the Antonian Roman aqueduct
Ben Abdelmalek Stadium
Nearby are

the Roman city of Tiddis
the megalithic monuments and burial grounds at Djebel Mazala Salluste.

The City of Bridges
The topography of the city is unique and it determines the need for bridges. At the end of the 19th century, Guy de Maupassant wrote: "Eight bridges used to cross this ravine. Six of these bridges are in ruins today." Today the most important bridges are:

Sidi M'Cid Bridge (1912), a suspension bridge with a length of 168m,
Bab El Kantra Bridge (1792) bridge which leads toward north,
Sidi Rached bridge (1912), a long viaduct of 447ms and 27 arches, designed by Paul Séjourné,
Devil's bridge, a tiny beam bridge,
Falls bridge (1925), formed by a series of arches on top of a waterfall,
Mellah Slimane Bridge (1925), a suspension bridge,
Salah Bey Bridge (Trans-Rhummel viaduct, 2014), the first cable-stayed bridge in Constantine, designed by Dissing+Weitling architecture,
Meddjez Dechiche Bridge

Education
Constantine has in general four universities: two of them are downtown Constantine Mentouri Public University, designed by the Brazilian architect Oscar Niemeyer, and Algerian architect Rashid Hassaine, including Zerzara technical engineering pole, Zouaghi Slimane Geography and Earth Sciences Pole, and in the City of El-Khroub is the Institute of Veterinary Sciences. Emir Abdelkader University is one of the biggest Islamic universities with many faculties covering religious studies, foreign languages, and literature. Constantine's new town "nouvelle ville ali mendjeli" has two big universities: Université Constantine 2 known as "lella nsoumer" offers maths, computer and economy majors, and the new university is actually a university pole with more than 20,000 students, 17 faculties and more than 40,000 residents. It is now the largest African university under the name of "Université Salah Boubnider" known as "Université Constantine 3".

Transport
Constantine is served by Mohamed Boudiaf International Airport.
Constantine also owns its 14.7 km-long tram network serving the city centre at the airport and the main neighbourhoods of the metropolis Constantine tramway.

Twin towns – sister cities
Constantine is twinned with:

Grenoble, France
Sousse, Tunisia

Notable people
Constantine has been the hometown of many noteworthy people in Algeria and France.

Abdelhamid Brahimi, former Prime Minister of Algeria (1984-1988)
Abdelhamid Ben Badis, Islamic reformer and philosopher
Abdelmalek Sellal, former Prime Minister of Algeria two terms (2012-2014),(2014-2017)
Ahmed Bey, last Bey of Constantine (1826-1848)
Ahlam Mosteghanemi, writer
Alfred Nakache, Olympic champion swimmer and Holocaust survivor.
Ali Saïdi-Sief, Olympic medallist
Amar Bentoumi, lawyer, Algerian independence activist, Algerian politician
Malek Bennabi, philosopher
Rabah Bitat, third President of Algeria (1978)
Sabri Boukadoum, former Minister of foreign affairs and acting Prime Minister
Mouloud Hamrouche, former Prime Minister of Algeria (1989-1991)
Djamel Eddine Laouisset, Algerian Scholar
Masinissa, the first King of Numidia
Hassiba Boulmerka, athlete, first Algerian woman to win an Olympic title (1992)
Princess Charlotte, Duchess of Valentinois, daughter of Louis II, Prince of Monaco, and mother of Prince Rainier III
Roger Chauviré (1880–1957), French writer
Claude Cohen-Tannoudji, Nobel Prize winner in physics
Sidi Fredj Halimi, Chief Rabbi and rabbinical court president
Enrico Macias, French singer
Cheb i Sabbah, DJ, musician and composer
Jean-Michel Atlan, artist
Alphonse Halimi, world champion boxer
Kateb Yacine, writer
Maurice Boitel, artist
Sandra Laoura, Olympic medallist
Malek Haddad, poet
Moussa Maaskri, actor
Fadéla M'rabet writer and feminist
Cherif Guellal, Algerian diplomat, first ambassador to the USA (1963-1967)

References
Further reading
Laura Maravall Buckwalter. 2019. "Factor endowments on the 'frontier': Algerian settler agriculture at the beginning of the 1900s." Economic History Review

External links

WorldStatesmen- Algeria
"Constantine (Cirta)"—Catholic Encyclopedia
The Cascades, Constantine, Algeria
Images of Constantine in Manar al-Athar digital heritage photo archive



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: SIDI M'CID BRIDGE
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: historical_site | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:01:29
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 269
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sidi_M%27Cid_Bridge
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sidi M'Cid Bridge is a 164-metre-long (538 ft) suspension bridge across the Rhumel River in Constantine, Algeria. It was opened to traffic in April 1912 and until 1929 was the highest bridge in the world at 175 m (574 ft). The bridge was designed by French engineer Ferdinand Arnodin and links the Casbah to Sidi M'Cid hill. The bridge underwent restoration in 2000 when 12 of its cables were replaced by the Algerian company SAPTA.

History
Constantine was an important city of 50,000 people when Émile Morinaud took over as the mayor and member of parliament in 1901. During his time in power till 1934, he went about modernizing the city. The Sidi M'Cid bridge, the Sidi Rached bridge and many other prominent buildings were constructed in this period. The bridge remained the highest bridge in the world till the Royal Gorge Bridge in Colorado opened in November 1929.
The Monument of the Dead is on one side of the bridge on the Sidi M'Cid hill. The monument is a replica of the Arch of Trajan in Timgad and commemorates the people of Constantine who laid down their lives fighting for France in the First World War. There is a natural bridge below the Sidi M'Cid bridge which blocks the view of the river from the bridge.

See also
List of longest suspension bridge spans
List of bridges by length
List of highest bridges in the world
List of tallest bridges in the world
Salah Bey Viaduct
Sidi Rached Viaduct
Bab El Kantra Bridge

References
External links
Images of Sidi M'Cid Bridge in Manar al-Athar digital heritage photo archive



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: PALACE OF AHMED BEY
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: historical_palace | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:01:37
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 282
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahmed_Bey_Palace
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bey's Palace (Arabic: قصر الباي) or Ahmad Bey Palace (Arabic: قصر احمد باي) is a historic palace in Constantine, Algeria. The palace was one of the main sights during the selection of Constantine as Arab Capital of Culture in 2015.

History
The palace was commissioned during the rule of Ahmed Bey ben Mohamed Chérif. Groundbreaking was in 1825, and completion was in 1835, two years before the fall of Constantine into the French occupation. Ahmad Bay summoned a Genovese engineer Chiavino, and two well known artists Al-Jabari and Al-Khatabi for the architectural design.
When the inauguration commenced in 1835–36, Ahmed Bey inhabited the palace as he became the ruler. Ahmed's enjoyment of this wonderful place was short-lived. Two years after he moved in, the French chased him out and turned the palace into their headquarters and with independence the Algerian military moved in and set up camp.

Building description
The palace consists of three suites and a garden where orange trees and palm trees are planted. The suites are connected to the hallway, which has arcs supported by 266 columns made of marbles. There are also three courtyards and two fountains made of marble. The ceilings are tiled with marble as well. There are 540 doors made of cedar woods, inscribed and engraved with different sculptures and decorations. More than 2,000 square meters of palace walls were decorated with paintings depicting Ahmed Bey's travels to Alexandria, Tripoli and Algeria, as well as 15 months of travel to Istanbul, Cairo and Hejaz in 1818 and 1819 in addition to other travels before and after his reign as Bey of Constantine.

Gallery
See also
Palace of the Dey in Algiers
Bey's Palace in Oran



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: EL KALA NATIONAL PARK
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: natural_site | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:01:45
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 374
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Kala_National_Park
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The El Kala National Park and Biosphere Reserve (Arabic: محمية القالة الوطنية) is one of the national parks of Algeria in the extreme north-east of the country. It is home to several lakes and a unique ecosystem in the Mediterranean basin. Several parts of the park have been designated as protected Ramsar sites.

History
The El Kala National Park and Biosphere Reserve was created by decree n° 83-462 of July 23, 1983, and recognized as a biosphere reserve by the UNESCO on 17 December 1990.
From 1994 to 1999, the World Bank financed a project to develop a natural resources management model for the park.

Geography
The park's highest hill is djebel El-Ghorra at 1202 m. The average temperature goes from 9 °C to 30 °C. The park has 50 km of shores facing the Mediterranean Sea.
The park has 6 lakes:

Lake Oubeira (2200 ha)
Lake Tonga (2600 ha)
Lake Mellah (860 ha), the only lagoon in Algeria which communicates with the sea
Marais of Bourdim (11 ha)
Blue lake (3 ha)
Black lake (6 ha)

Biosphere
The El Kala National Park and Biosphere Reserve is home to 40 species of mammals, 25 bird of prey species, 64 freshwater bird species and 9 marine bird species.  The Barbary stag is prevalent in the park.
An investigation led between 1996 and 2010 listed 1590 different types of vegetables in the park and 718 animal species. The main tree species are the Quercus suber (dominant), the Zeen oak, the Quercus coccifera, the Aleppo pine, the glutinous Alder, Willows, the White Poplar. Other tree species in the park include Eucalyptus, Acacias, Maritime pines and bald cypresses. 175 species of mushrooms were listed.
The park is threatened by the creation of a highway in Algeria which would threaten the rare animals and plants of the park. It has been proposed that the highway should avoid this region and go further south.

Gallery
Human population
87,000 people live in the El Kala National Park and Biosphere Reserve.

Tourism
The park averaged 30,000 visitors in 2001.

References
External links
Park data on UNEP-WPMC
(in French) A petition for the preservation of the park
(in French) A website about the park, including a map Archived 2011-07-20 at the Wayback Machine



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: HOGGAR MOUNTAINS
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: natural_site | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:01:56
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 664
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoggar_Mountains
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Hoggar Mountains (Arabic: جبال هقار, romanized: Jibāl Haqqār; Berber: idurar n Ahaggar) are a highland region in the central Sahara in southern Algeria, along the Tropic of Cancer. The mountains cover an area of approximately 550,000 km2.
The Hoggar Mountains are home to the Ahaggar Cultural Park (from 1987 to 2011 Ahaggar National Park). The tallest peak in the range and Algeria, Mount Tahat, is located in the park area, which covers approximately 450,000 square kilometres (170,000 sq mi).

Geography
This mountainous region is located about 1,500 km (930 mi) south of the capital, Algiers. The area is largely rocky desert with an average elevation of more than 900 m (3,000 ft) above sea level. The highest peak, Mount Tahat, is at 2,908 m (9,541 ft). The mountains are primarily composed of metamorphic rock approximately 2 billion years old, although there are areas where more recent volcanic activity has laid down much newer rock. Several of the more dramatic peaks, such as Ilamen, are the result of erosion wearing away extinct volcano domes, leaving behind the more resistant material that plugged the volcanic cones.

Assekrem is a famous and often visited point where Charles de Foucauld built a hermitage in 1911. 
The highlands are believed to be one of the main sources of the Tamanrasset River, an ancient river that flowed during the African humid period, and named after the main city near the Hoggar Mountains, Tamanrasset, built in a desert valley or wadi that was part of the ancient watercourse.

Environment
The Hoggar Mountains range typically experiences hot summers, with a cold winter climate. Temperatures fall below freezing over winter nights. Rainfall is rare and sporadic year-round. However, since the climate is less extreme than in most other areas of the Sahara, the mountains are a major location for biodiversity, including a number of relict species. The Hoggar Mountains are part of the West Saharan montane xeric woodlands ecoregion.

Flora and fauna
Vegetation in this area includes trees such as Vachellia tortilis, Vachellia seyal, myrtle and Tamarix aphylla which are scattered throughout the area. Other plants may include Citrullus colocynthis and Calotropis procera.
Slightly to the west of the Hoggar range, a population of the endangered African wild dog (Lycaon pictus) remained viable into the 20th century, but is now thought to be extirpated within this entire region. Relict populations of the West African crocodile persisted in the Hoggar Mountains until the early 20th century.
Analysis of collected scat in 2006 showed the presence of the Northwest African cheetah in the region. Between August 2008 and November 2010, four individuals were recorded by camera traps. A single cheetah was filmed and photographed by Algerian naturalists in 2020 in the national park in the Atakor volcanic field. The park also contains a population of herbivores such as the saharan subspecies of the barbary sheep and the Dorcas gazelle.
The park has been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports significant populations of spotted, crowned and Lichtenstein's Sandgrouse, Pharaoh eagle-owls, pallid harriers, greater hoopoe-larks, bar-tailed and desert larks, pale rock martins, fulvous babblers, white-crowned and mourning wheatears, desert sparrows and trumpeter finches.

History
Prehistoric settlement is evident from extant rock paintings dating to 6000 BC. The Hoggar Massif is the land of the Kel Ahaggar Tuareg. The tomb of Tin Hinan, the woman believed to be the matriarch of the Tuareg, is located at Abalessa, an oasis near Tamanrasset.
The hermitage of Charles de Foucauld, which continues to be inhabited by a few Catholic monks, is at the top of the Assekrem plateau in the Hoggar Mountains.
Underground atomic tests were conducted by France in the mountains in the 1960s.

See also
Saharan rock art
Teffedest Mountains

References
Further reading
Keenan, Jeremy (1977). The Tuareg: People of Ahaggar. London: Allen Lane, Penguin Books. ISBN 0-7139-0636-7.

External links

(in French) A website about the park
Park data on UNEP-WPMC
Ahaggar National Park - The Biodiverse Home of the Saharan Cheetah



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: EL OUED
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:02:12
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 304
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Oued
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

El Oued (Arabic: اﻟﻮادي, romanized: al-Wādī), Souf or Oued Souf is a city, and the capital of El Oued Province, in Algeria. The oasis town is watered by an underground river, hence its name is El Oued which enables date palm cultivation and the rare use (for the desert) of brick construction for housing. As most roofs are domed, it is known as the "City of a Thousand Domes".
El Oued is located 400 miles (640 km) south east of Algiers (the capital city of Algeria), near the Tunisian border. The population of El Oued was 134,699 as of the 2008 census, up from 105,256 in 1998, with a population growth rate of 2.5%.

History
In the 11th century, the Fatimids sent Banu Hilal to the Tripolitania, Tunisia and Constantine areas to fight against the Zirids.

Culture
The inhabitants belong to Teroud tribe (Arabic: بنو طرود) living in and near Oued Souf area.

Climate
El Oued has a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification BWh), with very hot summers and mild winters. Rainfall is light and sporadic, and summers are particularly dry.

Transportation
The N16 highway connects El Oued to Touggourt to the southwest and Tebessa to the northeast. The N48 connects El Oued to the town of Still to the north, from which the N3 may be used to reach Biskra.
El Oued lies about 20 kilometres (12 mi) south of Guemar Airport.

Education
7.4% of the population has a tertiary education, and another 17.5% has completed secondary education. The overall literacy rate is 86.1% (second highest in the province), and is 91.2% among males (second highest in the province) and 80.6% among females (equal highest in the province).

Localities
The commune of El Oued is composed of six localities:

References
External links

El-Oued: Pearl of Sahara Archived 2007-03-10 at the Wayback Machine



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: BISKRA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:02:21
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 3,012
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biskra
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Biskra (Arabic: بسكرة) is the capital city of Biskra Province, Algeria. In 2007, its population was recorded as 307,987. Biskra is located in northeastern Algeria, about 248 miles (399 km) from Algiers, 71 miles (114 km) southwest of Batna and 137 miles (220 km) north of Touggourt. It is nicknamed "The Queen of the Zibans", "The Door of the Desert" or "The Saharan Nice" because of its location at the beginning of the Sahara Desert. Due to its geographical location, its climate and natural resources, particularly farming, Biskra has always been a crossroad between the cities in the north and south. It has seen the passage of several civilizations, from the Romans and the Arabs to the French.
In 1844, Biskra became a French garrison, which saw fighting during rebellions in 1849 and 1871.
Currently the city of Biskra has 28 neighborhoods, including the three principal neighborhoods of Korra, City 60 Logements, and Equipment Zones. It is in the southern part of the Algerian rail system, and has become a popular winter resort.

Etymology
The city has been known by many names, including Biskra, Sokkra, Vescra, Vecera, Vescera, Adbesran. Historians do not agree on the origins of the current name. Some say its name comes from "Vescera", which means "station" or "place" of commercial exchange, due to its location connecting north and south. The Roman leader Betolimih Benyouba named it "the river of destiny" because of the Sidi Zarzour (its current name) that crosses the city.
Some researchers say that its name was derived from the ancient Roman name "Adebesran" because of the geothermal source that is located near the city, known as Salhine Hammam. Other sources say that the name comes from the word "Sokkra" because of the quality of the sweet dates in the city's oases. Still others claim that the current name was given to the city by the Carthaginians.
In honor of the city, the name was given to an oasis, Biskra Palms, near Palm Springs, California.

History
Gaetuli
The Gaetuli first appeared in North Africa during the 3rd millennium BC. They settled in a large territory south of the Roman provinces of Africa and Mauritania. According to the Greek historian Strabo, they were the most numerous people of North Africa yet the least known. Among the oldest references to the Gaetuli are those of the Carthaginians, who indicated that the Prince of the Gaetuli proposed to marry Élyssa (or Dido for the Romans), the founding queen of Carthage (present-day Tunisia) around 815 BC. However, references in ancient Egypt of certain tribes go back to 1350 BC, during the reign of Akhenaten of the eighteenth dynasty, speak of cattle trade with this people.
The Gaetuli are probably the origin of the Berber calendar, which begins around 943–949 BC, which would be after the victory of a coalition of Gétules over the Egyptians. This coalition, formed by the North African tribes, left southwestern Algeria, increasing its force as it passed through North Africa. The coalition led by Shoshenq (Berber name: Sheshnaq) defeated Pharaoh Psusennes II. Following this victory, Sheshnaq married the pharaoh's daughter, settled on the throne of Egypt under the name of Sheshonq in 952 BC, and founded the 22nd Dynasty. This biblical event is mentioned in the Old Testament, which speaks of the pillaging of this leader of the Machaouach tribe.
While traversing the desert, the Gaetuli arrived with the Taureg at Tassili, where they stayed for an extended time and subsequently mixed with the Tuareg and learned the Tamazight language for cultural and commercial exchanges. However, the Gaetuli eventually began to feel out of place and decided to continue north.
In Algeria, they settled at the edge of the Aures, where they posed problems to Roman infiltration in the 3rd century BC as they were stellar horsemen and became dreaded in combat. It was necessary to involve a late Roman politician, Gaius Marius, to negotiate exploration of the South against concessions of agricultural land around Cirta and Setifis, at the time under Roman rule; a trick of dispersing them and so diminished in their strength. Thus, the Gétule were occupied by the Romans.

Roman colonization
The city of Biskra experienced many violent wars during the Roman colonization, including the resistance war led by the Berber leader Tacfarinas, followed by his successor, the militant Jugurtha "Youghorta". With the help of the inhabitants of the city, who provided human and material support, Jugurtha destroyed the Roman army at the end of the so-called Numidia region.

The Vandals in the 4th century
The Vandals "Oundals" invaded the city of Biskra and occupied all its land, but the resistance and continuous fighting of its inhabitants forced the Vandals to integrate with them. After a few decades, the Romans took over the city, where they built obstacles to protect themselves from the vengeance of the population.

The arrival of the Arab conqueror Uqba ibn Nafi al-Fihri in the 7th century
They remained with such vigilance until the arrival of the Arab conqueror Uqba ibn Nafi al-Fihri in the 7th century AD. During this period, the whole area came under the Arab-Muslim monarchy. After 20 years of conquest, Uqba ibn Nafi died in 683 AD when he returned from Morocco with his army. His death was organized by an ambush mounted by his adversary, the Numidian prince (Berber) Koceila and his army at Tahouda, a small village located 5 km from the oasis "Sidi Okba". His body was buried in the mosque of the city that took his name. According to the imam of this mosque, it contains more than 300 tombs and is the 4th holy place of Islam, after Mecca, Medina and Aksa.
In the early 10th century, Biskra and the entire Ziban area were conquered by the kings of Beni Hammad.

The Hillal Bannis in the 12th century
Followed by the Kabyla of Elathbend banished Hilal (Hilalian Arabs) who removed and confiscated the property of the inhabitants. They asked for the help of the Almohads of the kingdom of Marrakech in the 12th century.

In the book Al Istibsar fi 'agaib al-Amsar, written in the late 12th century, the author describes the city as:"A large city, surrounded by many fortresses and thriving villages, and it serves as their capital. It has a vast forest abundant with palm trees, olive trees, and various fruits. Biskra is particularly known for its numerous palm trees. [..] A large river flows through the forest of Biskra, descending from the Aurès Mountains, irrigating its orchards and palm groves. It stretches for about six miles through a continuous forest connected to the city, running through its villages. Biskra is also a center of jurisprudence and knowledge, home to scholars. Among its villages is a place called Malsoun."

The Hafsids in the 14th century
In the 14th century, the Hafsid arrived in Tunisia and Algeria. Biskra became an important hub for the Hafsid of Tunisia where it remained under lure monarchy and direction for a long time then under the authority of the Marinid Sultanate of Fez and banned Abd-Elouadi and the Znatiyin of Tlemcen.

The conquest of the city by the Turks in 1541
In 1541, the Turks began their conquest of the city under the direction of Hocine Agha who defended the city of Algiers at the time and brought out the strength of Charles Compte of the latter.
The Ottoman Empire remained in the city for three centuries until the French colonized it.

French colonization from 1844
After the French conquest of Biskra in 1844, the site was fortified to secure the area against uprisings. El-hadj Mohammed Esaghire Elokbi, as the successor to El-Emir Abdelkader, waged continued war against the French, attacking the French forces under Lamoriciere on 23 December 1847. Elokbi also opposed the Ben Ghana clan as well as Ahmed Bey's claim as ruler of Constantine. Resistance continued in the Ziban and Aurès Moufrntains.
In Biskra the local chief Bou Zian rallied the people against the palm tax, seizing the moated fortification of Zaatcha 20 km from Biskra. The French marched on Zaatcha, laying siege for months. It finally fell after 53 days of attacks by a French force of 7,000 troops. Bou Zian was killed. The French counted the loss of 2130. French control nonetheless remained tenuous when attacks were mounted again in 1879 at El-kamri.
Some 100 years after the battle of Zaatcha, in 1954 Biskra was again the scene of anti-French assaults during the Algerian War of Independence where house-to-house battles cost many lives.

In culture
At the end of the 19th century Biskra, a popular spa town and gateway to the Sahara, became a center for artists and photographers such as Émile Frechon, Alexandre Bougault and Rudolf Franz Lehnert. From 1872 to 1920 the French Count Albert Landon de Longueville hosted in his villa-cum-chateau at Biskra (today Villa Bénévent), nobility, artists and writers, including Béla Bartok, Oscar Wilde, Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald, André Gide, Nasreddine Dinet, Eugène Fromentin, Karl Marx, Anatole France, Francis James and Henri Matisse.
Biskra is the setting of key sections of André Gide's 1902 novel The Immoralist and lesser known 1897 prose-poem Les nourritures terrestres (The Fruits of the Earth), and he visited the town in 1895 (for a fortnight from 31 January) with Lord Alfred Douglas, following a meeting with Oscar Wilde in Blida and Algiers.
The French artist Henri Matisse has a work titled Blue Nude (Souvenir de Biskra) an oil painting finished in 1907.
The Hungarian composer Béla Bartók collected traditional music in Biskra in 1913.
The Polish composer Karol Szymanowski, who traveled to North Africa, seemed to have been quite impressed by Biskra. This trip probably aroused genuine interest in the North African/ Arabic culture. He composed many pieces influenced by his experience there. He sent a postcard from Biskra on 11 April 1914.
Diana Mayo, the protagonist of Edith Maude Hull's popular 1919 novel The Sheik, starts her journey into the desert from Biskra, and in the identically named 1921 silent movie The Sheik starring Rudolph Valentino in perhaps his most famous role.
Winston Churchill's cousin, sculptor and author Clare Sheridan held a salon in Biskra in the 1920s and 1930s.

Geography
Biskra is located in the north-east of Algeria, in the district of Biskra. The city lies about 248 miles (399 km) from Algiers, 71 miles (114 km) southwest of Batna and 137 miles (220 km) north of Touggourt. She is nicknamed "The Queen of the Zibans", "The door of the desert" or "The Saharan Nice" because of its location which is the beginning of the desert.
It is located at an altitude of 87 m (285 ft) in the northern part of the Sahara Desert.
Apart from the mountains that surround it, the topography of Biskra is generally very flat. Part of the city is surrounded by the Sfa Pass and the Ziban Mountains. In the outskirts of Biskra, the landscape is very arid with all the same vegetation that vary depending on the location. Small water points can be found in the outskirts of Biskra, especially in the oases and canyons of the mountains around El Kantara. The prefecture of Biskra is crossed by Oued Labiod waterways, Oued El Arab, Djedi, Oued Meziraâ, Oued El and Oued el Gantara. The city covers an area of 127.55 km2 (49.25 sq mi). It has a population of 307,987 and is the 10th most populous city. It has a population density of 1,612.0 inhabitants per square meter. The population of Biskra are called Biskri.
As in the rest of the country, Biskra does not observe summer time and stays in the same time zone all year round. Whether winter or summer, the time is always the same in Biskra. The sunrise is around 7:41 am to 21 December and 5:24 am on 21 June. The sunset is around 5:30 pm on 21 December and at 7:54 pm on 21 June.

Cityscape
Neighborhoods
The city of Biskra has gone through three phases before getting to where it is today. Started by the pre-colonial phase which testifies, that the city was pending this period under Roman rule over country of the Berbers, and having taken the role of the capital of southern Numidia, and the
A very prosperous city, built by the Muslims in the Middle Ages. During the Turkish period the city was hit by epidemics, binding occupiers of the fort to leave the city to settle, in a group scattered the interior of the palm grove, south of the city, around two elements of the form local production, the built environment that are the mosque and seguias, besides the use local building materials.
Secondly, the city was marked by the colonial phase characterized by the building of fort Saint Germain on the northern part, and the construction of a city (the colonial checkerboard) by an urban model, different from the previous one, and having undergone several extension, particularly the 1st and 2nd and the Dervau Plan, followed during the 50s, by popular extensions to the South at the expense of the palm grove and without dimensional and formal logic.
In the end the post colonial phase characterized by the proliferation of self-built no plan to urban and architectural quality at least and without model, where typological reference, which has only to be curbed, after the instruction of the laws intervention and control of the state, over the urban space, by launching large Housing development operations in the framework of ZUNH, in the form of housing communal collective or subdivision which, despite this, has not been able to resolve the demand for housing, bringing the state to promulgation, other laws havingobjective, improving urban quality, openness and diversification stakeholders.
Today, the city of Biskra is made up of 28 neighborhoods including 3 main ones which are, Korra, City 60 Logts ENICAB and Equipment Zones.

Climate
Biskra has a subtropical hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification BWh) typical of the region in which it is found. The city has long and extremely hot summers and short, pleasantly warm winters. In summer, the peaks of heat are among the highest in the country with temperatures that can exceed 49 °C (120 °F) and are similar to cities like Luxor or Phoenix. The average peak July temperature, which is the hottest month, is about 42 °C (108 °F). On average, the city experiences more than 92 days a year where the temperature is equal to or exceeds 38 °C (100 °F) and nearly 20 days above 43 °C (109 °F). In comparison, New York City has had a total of 59 days when the temperature was equivalent to or above 38 °C (100 °F) since 1870. Temperatures generally begin to approach or even exceed 34 °C (93 °F) by April. Biskra is one of the hottest cities in the country when it comes to daytime temperatures. Indeed, this one is often higher than 27 °C (81 °F) during the hottest months. The highest minimum temperature recorded in Biskra was 37 °C (99 °F) on 4 July 1993, making it the hottest night ever recorded in the city. On 14 July 1910, the temperature reached 51 °C (124 °F) which is the record of heat in Biskra.

The climate is very dry and mostly very clear. Rainfall is limited to only 128.8 mm per year. Precipitation is quite rare despite some showers usually during the coldest months, mainly January and February, where it rains several times in the season, which brings the majority of humidity to Biskra in a year. The highest precipitation record recorded in Biskra in a year is (600.5 mm) in 1910 while the driest year is only (27.7 mm) recorded in 1945. The extreme heat that prevails during the summer can cause violent storms at the end of it and usually occur in September, when the air humidity becomes significantly higher with an average of 41% moisture per year. The month with the highest air rate in Biskra is December with 59% humidity, July is the least heavy month with only 27% on average per year. Aside from rainfall or humidity, sandstorms can occur several times a month and even become Haboob, which can make visibility almost zero. Biskra has a very good duration of sunshine in the year with an average of 3,292 hours of sunshine a year. The wettest month is November with (20.1 mm), while July is the driest month with (1.7 mm).
The hot, dry and sunny climate of the city sometimes attracts some inhabitants of the northern regions as in the city of Batna located 115 km northeast, which experiences fairly icy and wet winters during this period, to enjoy the pleasant weather and sunny in winter.
On average, Biskra knows no day in the year with a temperature below zero. Moving away from the urban area, the risk of frost may be more frequent and night temperatures are lower. Biskra very rarely experiences freezing days and only occurs occasionally during periods of mild cold weather. what can happen to Biskra and its surroundings. The record for the largest number of frost days recorded at Biskra in a winter is 1980–1981 with 73 days, while the record for the number of consecutive years experiencing freeze-up in Biskra is 1886 years. 1888. The lowest recorded temperature in Biskra was −5 °C (23 °F) on 27 December 1914, while the lowest daily maximum temperature was 7 °C (45 °F) on 2 February 1934.

Flora and Fauna
The fauna of Biskra is characterized by a great diversity of insects such as Sacred Scarab and yellow broad-tailed scorpions are found. There are also amphibians like frog, reptiles like the Horned Viper or the Egyptian cobra. A variety of birds including Black Warbler, mammals such as Gazelles, small Gerboise, Fox, Wild boar, Hare, Hedgehog, Bat, Myriapods, Crustaceans such as the Crab stream or the Water Flea. There are also a lot of black and red spiders that some species hide in dead tree stumps.

Demographics
Population
References
External links
 Media related to Biskra at Wikimedia Commons

(in French) Biskra City



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: BEJAIA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:02:29
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 5,590
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B%C3%A9ja%C3%AFa
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Béjaïa ( bij-EYE-ə; Arabic: بجاية, romanized: Bijāya, pronounced [biˈdʒaːja], locally [ˈb(d)ʒæːjə]), formerly known as Bougie and Bugia, is a Mediterranean port city and commune on the Gulf of Béjaïa in Algeria; it is the capital of Béjaïa Province.

Geography
Location
Béjaïa owes its existence to its port, which also makes it prosperous. It is located in a sickle-shaped bay protected from the swell of offshore winds (northwest facing) by the advance of Cape Carbon (to the west of the city). The city is backed by Mount Gouraya located in a northwest position. This port site, in one of the most beautiful bays of the Maghreb and Mediterranean coast, is dominated in the background by the Babors mountain range. Another advantage is that the city is the outlet of the Soummam valley, a geographical corridor facing southwest. However, since the time when the city was a capital, there has been a divorce between the city and the region (Kabylia) linked to the difficulty of securing a hinterland. On a macro-regional scale, the city has its back to the region: its position at the end of the Soummam places it at the interface between Grande and Petite Kabylie. But these two groups are closed in on themselves and seek inland capitals (Tizi Ouzou, Akbou, Kherrata, etc.) by turning away from the coast. The city has, in a way, weak local roots; the rural proximity of the city is limited to four or five communes. On a micro-regional scale, Béjaïa is the outlet of a central Algeria, going from Algiers to Skikda, the spillway of the Highlands and a supply port for two million people. But the connection is complex: to the south-east, trade with Sétif is only possible through the steep gorges of Kherrata; another route takes the Soummam, then to the east the Iron Gates and the climb towards Bordj Bou Arreridj, it is this route that is taken by the national road and the railway. These topographical constraints mean that, despite its strong dynamism, the city sees part of the trade escape it in its eastern and western areas of influence.
The town is overlooked by the mountain Yemma Gouraya. Other nearby scenic spots include the Aiguades beach and the Pic des Singes (Peak of the Monkeys); the latter site is a habitat for the endangered Barbary macaque, which prehistorically had a much broader distribution than at present. All three of these geographic features are located in the Gouraya National Park.

The urban area covers an area of 12,022 hectares. Béjaïa is located 220 km east of the capital Algiers, 93 km east of Tizi Ouzou, 81.5 km northeast of Bordj Bou Arreridj, 70 km northwest of Sétif and 61 km west of Jijel. The geographic coordinates of the commune at the central point of its capital are 36° 45′ 00″ North and 5° 04′ 00″ East, respectively.

Toponymy
Béjaïa is transliteration from an Arabic toponym derived from the Berber toponym (Kabyle variant) Bgayet, notably by transliteration (see Transcription and transliteration) of the sound ǧ in dj (ج). This Berber name — which would have originally been Tabgayet, but whose initial t marking the feminine gender would have fallen into disuse — would come from the words tabegga, tabeɣayt, meaning "wild brambles and blackberries".  In Tifinagh script, the name of the city is ⴱⴳⴰⵢⴻⵜ (Bgayet). · 
The name Béjaïa would thus originally have the same Berber root as other names of cities in the Maghreb, such as Dougga (Thouga) and Béja (Vaga) in Tunisia or Ksar Baghaï (Bagaï) in the Aurès.
In medieval Romance languages, Bugaya (from Arabic Bugāya; in Spanish Bujía and in Italian Bugía is the name given to the city, which supplied a large quantity of beeswax for the manufacture of candles. Bougie became the French form of this transcription of the Arabic name. Gradually it came to refer to the wax that was imported in the Middle Ages for the manufacture of candles in Europe; they are from then on commonly designated in French by the word "bougie". This in turn is carried over to the word Bugia, meaning a long-handled candlestick used by Catholic bishops and high-ranking priests.

Climate and hydrography
The city is part of the Soummam's drainage basin. Béjaïa and the lower Soummam Valley enjoy a Mediterranean climate. It is generally humid with a slight seasonal temperature change. Average temperatures are generally mild and vary from 11.1 °C in winter to 24.5 °C in summer.
In addition to the Soummam River, which sufficiently meets agricultural needs in the surroundings of the city, Béjaïa is located in the maritime Kabylie and benefits from a fairly favorable rainfall compared to the rest of the country. The rainfall in the region can range from 800 mm to 1,200 mm, but some local sources tend to be depleted due to increased demand. The city also draws its water resources from the mountainous hinterland and from various springs, such as that of Toudja, which was connected in ancient times by an aqueduct to the ancient city (Saldae).

Roadside and rail communications
The city of Béjaïa is linked to Algiers, Tizi Ouzou, Bouira, Sétif, Jijel and several Kabyle localities by an important road network. It has a bus station. Bus lines connect it to the cities of the Algerian south, including Hassi Messaoud, Ouargla, Ghardaïa, Laghouat, Djelfa and Bou Saâda.
The commune of Béjaïa is served by several national roads. Some of them run through valleys and gorges that constitute natural passage areas: national road 9 (Sétif road), which passes along the coast then the Kherrata gorges to Sétif, and national road 24 (Béjaïa road), which crosses the Soummam valley, Bouira, then Algiers to the west, or Bordj Bou Arreridj to the east. Others run through steeper terrain: national road 12 (Tizi Ouzou road), passing through the Yakouren forest and its mountains then Azazga, Tizi-Ouzou to Boumerdès, and national road 75 (Batna road), passing through Barbacha and the mountains of Petite Kabylie to reach Sétif and join the Highlands to Batna. A highway construction project is underway to ease congestion on the Béjaïa road, the main axis between the capital and the east of the country, and to connect the city and its port, one of the most important in Algeria, to the Algerian East-West highway.
Béjaïa has a railway station, the terminus of the Beni Mansour-Bejaia line, created in 1889 and on which a railcar runs linking the stations in the region: Beni Mansour, Tazmalt, Allaghan, Akbou, Lazib Ben Cherif, Ighzer Amokrane, Takriets, Sidi Aich, Ilmaten and El Kseur, The interconnection, at Beni Mansour, with the Algiers-Skikda line, allows access to the entire Algerian railway network by direct links to the Algerian capital, to the west, and to Sétif, to the south-east. A regional train specifically linking Béjaïa to its outskirts is also in service; it was designed to open up the east of the region. The line would benefit from about fifteen daily round trips and should serve the stations of the Beni Mansour-Bejaia line. Bejaia has an international airport located 5 km south of the city. It was first called "Bejaia - Soummam Airport" between 1982 and 1999, named after the Soummam River which flows into the Mediterranean near Bejaia. It was inaugurated in 1982 for domestic flights and in 1993 for international flights. It was renamed "Bejaia - Soummam - Abane Ramdane Airport" in 1999, in homage to the Algerian politician who played a key role in the history of the Algerian War of Independence.

History
Prehistory
The presence of man is attested in various urban and peri-urban sites. The Ali Bacha cave station would represent the oldest settlement site around 40,000 to 20,000 BC. On the Aiguades site, the equipment and furniture found evoke a period around 10,000 BC and therefore Neolithic. The region is also rich in archaeological deposits such as the Afalou caves where some of the oldest burials of modern men, known as Mechta-Afalou men, have been found, which testifies to a culture focused on compassion with the burial of individuals in cave-sanctuary-necropolises and the use of clay pottery dated from 18,000 to 11,000 BC. These deposits are typical of the so-called Iberomaurusian archaeological culture.

Antiquity and Byzantine era
The city contains remains from the Bronze Age. The oldest known remains are a "hanout" which is a form of Libyc tomb. Long attributed to the Punic culture, it is in fact much older, its dating is interdetermined.
The advantageous site, sheltered from the winds by Cape Carbon, was surely occupied very early. The first trace of historical mention appears in the 5th century BC in the Periplus of Pseudo-Scylax. The region was part of the kingdom of Numidia. In addition, the Punic influence is present: the Carthaginians traveled the North African coasts to trade and establish trading posts called emporioe.
Jugurtha's defeat by the Romans changed the latter's alliance into a suzerainty; Augustus divided the territory into provinces constituting Caesarean Mauretania, and, according to Pliny the Elder, Saldae (the ancient name of the city) was a Roman colony founded with the first annexations in 33 BC. Eight years later, he returned the province of the city to the Numidian king Juba II in compensation for his hereditary states. The city acquired a predominantly Latin culture and was Christianized. The Romans set up various hydraulic networks that would be reused centuries later in the Hammadid era. The Toudja aqueduct dates from the reign of Antoninus Pius. But the city did not know the importance of the development of Hippo (Annaba), which flourished more under the Romans.

Augustus also founded Tubusuptus, the current ruins of Tiklat, a few kilometres away on the banks of the Nasava (Soummam). From the 1st century, the revolt of Tacfarinas involved all the Numidian populations of the region; he invested the Soummam valley, took Tiklat and reached Saldae. He was finally pushed back by the proconsul Publius Cornelius Dolabella. In the 4th century, in the mountains near Saldae, Firmus gathered the "Quinquegentians" (current Kabyle tribes of Djurdjura) and led them against the Romans. Count Theodosius arrived with troops from Europe to put down the revolt; he had difficulty overcoming the insurgents.
The Vandals in turn entered North Africa from Spain in 429. Led by Genseric, they carried iron to all the coastal towns. They made Saldae the capital of their new state until the capture of Carthage in 439. The struggles between the supporters of Arianism and those of Catholicism weakened the entire region; the Byzantines then found there a pretext and an opportunity to intervene. The city then fell under Byzantine domination in the Vandalic War in 533. The heavy Byzantine oppression also soon gave rise to the population's desire for revolt until the Arab conquest of North Africa.

Muslim and feudal rulers
The Arab Conquest
Seen by the Umayyad Arab conquerors who came from Kairouan, the mountains around Béjaïa were nicknamed el 'adua ("the enemy") to designate the stubborn resistance they were the seat of. Information on this period is scattered, or contradictory; it seems that the city was conquered relatively late, around the year 708. An unlikely hypothesis would have it that the name Béjaïa comes from this period from the Arabic word بقاية (Baqâyâ,  "the remains, the survivors") because it would have served as a fallback for the Christian and Jewish populations of Constantine and Sétif. According to Ibn Khaldun, the name Béjaïa would rather come from that of the tribe that inhabited the city: the "Bedjaïa".
The three centuries that followed the conquest are obscure due to the lack of accounts. The city was part of the Aghlabid territory, then that of the Fatimids, under whose rule it experienced a certain effervescence. It seems that when the Hammadid sovereign Nasir founded his capital al-Nasirya there, in 1067, the monuments of ancient Saldae were in ruins. Several hypotheses supported by local traditions explain this state: the city would have experienced 7 earthquakes or a similar number of enemy attacks. It seems established that in the 10th century, the city was in the hands of the Sanhaja Berbers, from whom came the Zirid and Hammadid dynasties which reigned over the Central Maghreb. It is then a town essentially populated by Andalusis, in accordance with the description given by the Andalusi geographer al-Bakri, before the policy of the Hammadids gave a decisive boost to the city.

Berber Dynasties: The Glory of a Medieval Capital
In the 10th century, the city was only a small fishing port. In 1067, the Berber sovereign of the Hammadid dynasty, Nasir ibn Alnas (1062-1088), ruling over the Central Maghreb, developed the city and made it his capital. Indeed, his first capital, the Qal'a of Banu Hammad, in the Highlands, was under threat from raids by the Hilalian Arab nomads who, hailing from the Middle East, had launched a second wave of Arab invasions into the Maghreb. He gave the city the name al-Nasiriya, which it would struggle to keep in the face of its toponym Béjaïa, which was already well established in usage. As Ibn Khaldun reports, this is due to the fact that the toponym Bejaïa is linked to the name of the Berber tribe populating this place.
Before acquiring its status as capital, the city experienced remarkable dynamism, particularly on the cultural level; it was in fact the port at the crossroads of the Qal'a of Banu Hammad, and al-Andalus. Scholars and traders passed through it and it was the outlet of the triq sultan, the royal road from the High Plateaus to the Mediterranean and even an outlet for trans-Saharan trade. The Kalbid emirs of Sicily were inspired by the palaces of Bejaïa to establish those of Palermo. The city, more than a recognized or appreciated place, was a place of obligatory passage; It is a real crossroads on the road from al-Andalus to the East (especially for pilgrims going to Mecca) but also from Europe to Africa. It is a place of meetings and exchanges of knowledge between local communities, from Europe and the East.

The establishment of the Hammadid sovereigns will make it the capital of the Central Maghreb and the Algerian madinat at tarikh (the city of history). An original political fact on the scale of the ancient Maghreb, it is a coastal capital. It becomes one of the main cultural and scientific centers of the western Mediterranean and an important commercial center for Europe. If the precise state of the Bougiotte merchant fleet is unknown, it occupies a significant place in the Mediterranean without however being preponderant compared to the European merchant fleets. It is frequented by Latin merchants, Pisans and Genoese, Andalusis and later Catalans. These traders from the south of Europe gave it various names in Romance languages: Bugia, Buzia, Bugea, Buzana. It was at this time that the city's wax, exported to Europe for the making of candles, gave the word "bougie" to French and the word "basane" to designate skins; lexical borrowing of the transcribed names of the city (respectively Bougie and Buzana). The city exported beeswax and skins in quantity, tannic barks for working leather (the iscorzia di Bugiea was famous in the 14th century), alum, cereals, raisins, wool and cotton from Biskra and M'sila, metals and pottery. The city also imported various goods such as metals, fabric, dyes and medicinal herbs. It was also a naval base for the Hammadids, and the starting point for naval expeditions to the "country of Rum" (from which Sicily was three days' sailing). The Hammadid fleet played an important role in the western Mediterranean; it slowed down European advances, particularly those of the Normans of Sicily in the 12th century. The Hammadids attracted scholars from all backgrounds and practiced an open policy, particularly towards Europe. Jews and Christians benefited from favorable conditions; the Emir Nasir maintained regular correspondence with Pope Gregory VII and asked him to appoint a bishop for his city. The arrival of scholars made Béjaïa a leading city in the field of science; its influence extended beyond the Mediterranean and reached Europe. An Andalusian culture mixed with traditional oriental inspiration, secular sciences developed as did sacred sciences. Unlike the Qal'a in the hinterland, it is considered a cultural and "modern" city for its time; A "Berber city living in the oriental style", many illustrious scholars came from it or settled there throughout its medieval period: Al Madani (10th century), Ibn Hammad, Yahia Zwawi, Leonardo Fibonacci (12th century), Ramon Llull and Ibn Khaldun (13th century).
Scholars came to complete their training in the city as they did in Cairo, Tunis or Tlemcen. Hundreds of students, some of European origin, crowded into the schools and mosques where theologians, jurists, philosophers and scholars taught. The main places of medieval knowledge were the Great Mosque, Madinat al-`Ilm (the City of Sciences), the Khizana Sultaniya and the Sidi Touati Institute. The jurist Al Ghobrini (1246-1314), qadi of the city, described the scholars of Béjaïa as "princes of science", among whom were Abu Madyan, Abd al-Haq al-Isbili, al-Qurashi and Abu Tamim Ben Gebara. These scholars met in audiences where they consulted on various subjects.

There is a rivalry and intellectual exchanges between Tlemcen, the Zeneta and Béjaïa, the Sanhaja.  This tolerance of the city is nuanced by one of the versions of the story of the death of Ramon Llull. Indeed, according to one version, he was stoned by the Bougiotes who had accused him of wanting to convert them to Christianity when other versions affirm that he was simply shipwrecked on his return to Mallorca from Tunis.
In 1202, Leonardo Fibonacci, an Italian mathematician, brought back the "Arabic numerals" and the algebraic notation. According to the versions, the inspiration for the Fibonacci sequence would be due to the observation of beekeepers and the reproduction of bees in the region or to a local mathematical problem concerning the reproduction of rabbits that he describes in his work  Liber abaci.
At that time the city had developed so much that, according to Leo Africanus, it was populated by several tens of thousands of people from all over the Maghreb, the Levant, Europe and Asia. The indigenous population of the city was mainly composed of Berbers from the Kabyle hinterland and the large community of Andalusian refugees. The population estimate at that time is put at 100,000 inhabitants by Al Idrissi. Mohammad Ibn Tumart met Abd al-Mu'min, the one who would become the caliph of his movement and of a new state (the Almohads), near Béjaïa around 1118.
Mohammad Ibn Tumart preached a return to the sources of Islam from Mellala, a town located 10 km from Béjaïa. Years before, the Almohad guide was said to have been driven out by the people of Bejaia, whom he had strongly criticized for their morals. The political movement he founded was the basis of the Almohad Empire, which seized Bejaia in 1152 and deposed the Hammadids. The city retained its strategic importance under the Almohads; it became a provincial capital. The caliph Abd el Mumin appointed a member of his own family as governor of the city, a testament to its strategic importance. The city's port housed the caliph's fleet and that of the Hammadids, which he had seized. In 1183, for a brief period, the Banu Ghaniya (remnants of the Almoravid dynasty) seized Bejaia before the Almohads regained control of it.
After the breakup of the Almohad Empire, Béjaïa returned to the orbit of the Hafsid Berbers of Tunis who became independent in June 1228. But in reality, due to the fragmentation and succession disputes, the emir or sultan of Béjaïa became independent from that of Tunis at the head of a real dissident kingdom over various periods, the last of which before the Spanish conquest extended over the entire 15th century, at which time it was called the "kingdom de Bougie ". Trade remained active with the Christian states and the city was one of the main reception points for Andalusian refugees fleeing the Reconquista.

The centuries of decadence of Bejaia
Like the tragic fate suffered at the turn of the 15th century by many caravanserais and several medieval cities of the Sahara and the Maghreb coast, sometimes radically, those characterized by an economy significantly linked to trans-Saharan-Mediterranean trade as well as by a lack of substitutes inherently or de facto (such as Mahdia in Tunisia, Honaïne in Algeria, radically Sijilmasa in Morocco, etc.), Bejaia thus begins its decline in this context of a combination of circumstances of reconfiguration of world trade in favor of new maritime routes dominated at first by the Portuguese and the Dutch to the detriment of the previous caravan routes and what was related to them.

A coveted city
The Spanish, in the wake of the Reconquista, carried out raids on the ports of North Africa. The city was taken by the Spaniard Pedro Navarro in 1510 from Sultan Abdelaziz. The Spanish put an end to the "kingdom of Bougie" in the central Maghreb. They made the city one of their trading posts which was maintained thanks to relations with Pisa and Genoa. But their harshness caused the flight of the local population, and conflicts with the surrounding Berbers. The city could no longer serve as a relay for trade with the hinterland and Abu Bakr, Abdelaziz's brother and sultan, tried to retake the city in 1512 from his new capital, Constantine (using the Zianid siege system of the 14th century).
The Spanish were content to control a perimeter forming a sort of triangle between Bordj Abdelkader, the Casbah and Bordj Moussa. The city outside these limits was not defendable by the weak Spanish garrison and was ruined. The spirit of the Inquisition influenced local Spanish politics, the Jews were driven out of the city and the urban elites, including the scholars, fled. The scholarly tradition then moved massively to the zaouïas of the Kabyle hinterland, the manuscripts were also moved and dispersed. The population of the city was in free fall, and even the Spanish garrison was increasingly reduced; it numbered 500 men in 1555.
The former possessions of Béjaïa were fragmented, which hindered the reconquest of the city. In Kabylie, El Abbès, the son of the Sultan of Béjaïa, founded his principality around the Kalâa of Ait Abbès, taking part of the city's elites; on the west bank of the Soummam he was in competition with Belkadi, descendant of the Bougiote jurist Al Ghobrini who founded the Sultanate of Kuku. In Constantine it was Abou Bakr, brother of the former sultan, who proclaimed himself sultan over all of eastern Algeria. These various protagonists, rivals among themselves, each hoped to reconquer the city and unify its former dependencies.

It was at this time, when the old states were in decline, that the Barbarossa brothers, Greek corsairs converted to Islam, appeared and settled in the neighboring city of Jijel. They joined the various attempts to retake the city from the Spanish thanks to their expertise in navigation. They eventually founded their own state around Algiers, based partly on corsair activity, and rapidly extended their influence over northern Algeria by gradually entering the Ottoman orbit and presenting themselves in the eyes of the population as direct competitors of the Spanish. Béjaïa quickly became a strategic objective; the Barbarossa gradually ousted the Hafsids from Constantine and Annaba. Charles V used the city as a fallback after the disastrous 1541 expedition against Algiers.

A marginalized city
The Barbarossa would never achieve their goal of retaking Béjaïa during their lifetime. It was one of their successors, the beylerbey Salah Raïs, who finally entered the city after the Battle of Béjaïa (1555) with the help of the Kabyles of Koukou. The city was integrated into the Regency of Algiers and depended on the Beylik of Constantine until 1830. The territorial division into three beyliks placed the city in a marginal position. The political dream of the Barbarossa to establish their capital in Béjaïa was abandoned; the regency was already established in Algiers, which was a fortified port and in which many developments had been carried out. The only major institution maintained during this period was that of the dar senâa, the shipyards or arsenals of the city which supplied ships to the regency. 

The city, with a Turkish caïd, was seen above all as a city that could potentially compete with Algiers and is surrounded by hostile mountains. The rise of its corsair fleets was closely monitored for fear of competition with that of Algiers; the Algiers fleet came to its coves, where it was naturally sheltered, during the winter. The city therefore saw its decline accelerate after the departure of the Spanish. The inhabitants maintained a small merchant fleet of about twenty feluccas which traded with Algiers, Oran, Bouna and Tunis to export the region's produce during favorable weather. In winter, this fleet was stationed on the beach of Dar senâa under the Casbah and not refloated until spring. The goods exported included oil, wax, dried figs, and leather; fabrics and cereals are imported. These ships could transport wood for the karasta: the exploitation of wood for the shipbuilding of Algiers. Corsair activity continued during this period, particularly with that of Jijel. In 1671, the city was targeted by the English led by Edward Spragge who bombarded it to stop the corsair attacks on their ships. During this entire period, the city was not maintained, and the descriptions of various travelers reflect the deterioration of the buildings and the lack of repair. Sidi M'hamed Amokrane, a marabout, son of the Sultan of Aït Abbas, Sidi Naceur Amokrane (or Mokrani), settled near Béjaïa around 1630, before going to Jijel. He moved his zaouïa from the village of Ama'dan to the city where the Turks charged him with running the karasta. At the time of Al Warthilani (1713 – 1779), the city was in the hands of three important figures: the cadi, the caid and the descendant of the marabout Mokrani.
The caids asked the marabouts to pass under the laânaya (protection) of the troops of Béjaïa until Algiers. Indeed, the city located in the heart of Kabylie, independent of the executive power of Algiers, was often besieged during insurrectional conflicts between the various confederations of the region. During the great revolt of 1806, led by the sheriff Ben el Harche, the city was besieged without success. In 1823, the tribes of Bibans and Soummam seized the caid of the city. In 1825, the agha Yahia, commander of the troops from Algiers, invaded the city and launched operations of repression against the tribes of Soummam.

The fall of the regency and the colonial period
In 1830, the French launched the conquest of Algeria. At first, the expedition was directed against Algiers. But very soon, the invaders sought to occupy the entire country, in particular Kabylie against which several expeditions were directed. Béjaïa, which had come under the control of the Mezzaïa tribe after the fall of the dey of Algiers, was involved in several incidents with French and British ships. In 1831, two expeditions aimed at imposing as its caïd a man named Mourad, then a certain Bou Setta, were thwarted. A new expedition resulted in the capture of the city in 1833, after fierce resistance from its inhabitants. However, the French failed to conquer the surrounding area.

The city and its region put up fierce resistance to the French colonial presence; moreover, like the Spanish in the 16th century, the French were content with a limited occupation until 1846. Various defensive works were built around the square, particularly on the heights.
The city took part in several uprisings and insurrections, such as that of the sheriff Boubaghla, and especially the great revolt of Sheikh El Mokrani and Sheikh Aheddad in 1871. At the time of the French conquest, the city was no more than a very modest town of around 2,000 inhabitants. The city was made a fully-fledged commune by decree of 17 June 1854. The French partially filled in the bay and developed the city's port and outer harbor. Urban planning work (development of the seafront and major roads) left its mark on its urban fabric. It gradually regains its role as an outlet for Kabylia, and as an export port for local agricultural products. Algerian inhabitants still maintain their coastal shipping activity. In 1906, the Cape Carbon lighthouse was built, it is the highest in the world due to its natural location (altitude 220 meters) and it has a range of 33 miles.
During World War II, Operation Torch landed forces in North Africa, including a battalion of the British Army's Queen's Own Royal West Kent Regiment at Béjaïa on 11 November 1942. That same day, at 4:40 PM, a German Luftwaffe air raid struck Béjaïa with thirty Ju 88 bombers and torpedo planes. The transports Awatea and Cathay were sunk and the monitor HMS Roberts was damaged. The following day, the anti-aircraft ship SS Tynwald was torpedoed and sank, while the transport Karanja was bombed and destroyed.
On May 8, 1945, the repression led by the French colonial forces in Kherrata, where the navy was used for a naval bombardment of the coasts of the Béjaïa region, caused thousands of victims.
During the Algerian War of Independence, the organization of the FLN and the ALN created for the first time a Kabyle administrative territory, the wilaya III; Béjaïa is part of this group. The Soummam congress, which is the political meeting of the FLN which sets the political-military line of the Algerian national movement in the war, takes place in Ouzellaguen, in the Bougiote hinterland.

The modern agglomeration
On the eve of the Algerian War in 1954, it had 30,000 inhabitants, including 6,200 Europeans. One of the last decisions of the colonial administration was to build an oil pipeline from Hassi Messaoud, with the city as a terminal depot and oil port. In 1959, Béjaïa was the most important oil port in Algeria, which was a source of income. In 1962, it was integrated into the wilaya of Sétif, before becoming the seat of its own wilaya in 1974. The city experienced a demographic boom, and an urbanization of the Lekhmis plain, following the influx of rural people, particularly from Kabylie.
Béjaïa, like other cities in Soummam, was one of the centers of Berber identity claims during the Berber Spring of 1980; and in 2001, during the Black Spring. If it struggles to establish itself as the economic capital of Little Kabylia, it is undeniably the cultural capital of Kabylia, in competition with Tizi-Ouzou. The opening of the political field has allowed the emergence of groups, associations, artistic and cultural events of all types. The University Center, by its presence, supports the movement; a Tamazight language institute is planned to be installed in Béjaïa.
This rapid expansion of the city is also a challenge in terms of urban planning; the city is indeed struggling to ensure a hinterland due to the relief. On the other hand, heritage and culture are also an issue because they are threatened in the long term. The exceptional site also raises the environmental question and that of pollution linked to domestic and industrial activities. In the early 1990s, the increase in population combined with the lack of planning and the inadequacy of public policies degraded the living environment of the city, despite certain assets for its future.

Urban planning
Downtown
The downtown of Béjaïa comprises the colonial quarter and the old town, the medina, itself largely reshaped by urban planning during the Spanish Empire and later by French Algeria. The old town is nestled against the Gouraya massif; it was marked by the Spanish presence, during which it lost numerous medieval buildings (such as the Hammadid Palace of the Star), and then by French developments. This area, however, is not lacking in ancient (particularly archaeological) or medieval buildings and remains; the Acherchour, Karamane, and Bab El Louz districts still boast Moorish houses. But due to a lack of maintenance, public awareness, and preservation, the introduction of inauthentic materials (concrete, brick, etc.) threatens this heritage. The city's defensive structures are still present in various locations within the old town (Bab el Bounoud, the Hammadid wall near the port, the Casbah, etc.). The colonial part of the city is particularly notable for the seafront district, which encroaches upon part of the old town and the port. Inspired by Haussmannian architecture, it also includes the famous Place du 1er Novembre, still known as Place Geydon.

Demographics
The population of the city was 177,988 as of the 2008 census.

Economy
The northern terminus of the Hassi Messaoud oil pipeline from the Sahara, Béjaïa is an oil exporting port. Other exports include iron ore, phosphates, and wine. The city also has a cork industry.
Cevital, the largest private conglomerate in Algeria, is headquartered in the city.

Sports
The city is home to football clubs JSM Béjaïa and MO Béjaïa.

Twin towns – sister cities
Béjaïa has an official friendly relationship with:

 Glasgow, Scotland, since 1995
 Brest
 Bad Homburg

Villages
Ilougane

Notable people
Zaki Hannache (born 1987), human rights activist
Nihad Hihat (born 1994), volleyball player
Rebiha Khebtani (1926–2006), politician
Nassim Oussalah (born 1981), footballer
Fares Arfa (born 1994), fencer

See also
European enclaves in North Africa before 1830
List of lighthouses in Algeria
Saldae, for Roman history and concurrent Catholic titular see
Great Mosque of Béjaïa
Related people
Abu al-Salt
Fibonacci

Notes
References
Sources
External links

(in French) Bgayet.Net
(in French) History of Béjaïa
GigaCatholic, with titular incumbent biography links
Google map of Béjaïa



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: ANNABA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:02:38
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,943
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Annaba
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Annaba (Arabic: عنابة, lit. 'place of the Jujubes'), formerly known as Bon, Bona and Bône, is a seaport city in the northeastern corner of Algeria, close to the border with Tunisia. Annaba is near the small Seybouse River and is in Annaba Province. With a population of about 263,650 (2019) and 1,000,000 for the metropolitan area, Annaba is the third-largest city and the leading industrial center in Algeria.
Annaba is a coastal city that underwent significant growth during the 20th century. Annaba has a metropolitan area with a higher population density than the other metropolitan areas of the Algerian coastline, such as Oran and Algiers. Much of eastern and southern Algeria uses the services, equipment and infrastructure of Annaba. Economically, it is the centre for various economic activities, such as industry, transportation, finance, and tourism.

Names
Present-day Annaba grew up on the site of Aphrodisium, the seaport of the Roman city Hippo Regius. (The modern city has since expanded south over Hippo's ruins as well.) Its former names Bône and Bona derived from "Ubbo", a local form of the name Hippo. Its informal name "Land of the Jujubes" (بلد العناب, Balad al-‘Unnāb) derives from the abundance of that fruit in the region.

History
Ancient
The area of Annaba has yielded evidence of very early human occupation at Ain el Hanech, near Saïda (circa 200,000 BC), including artifacts that show remarkable toolmaking craftsmanship. According to some sources, prehistoric Algeria was the site of the most advanced development of flake-tool techniques in the Middle Early Stone Age (Middle Paleolithic).
The town of Hippo Regius (modern Annaba) first entered historical records at the end of the 3rd century BCE as a possession of Massinissa's Numidian Kingdom. Augustine of Hippo was bishop here from 396 AD until his death in 430 AD. The city was destroyed in the 5th century by the Vandals. Vandals ruled the city for roughly a century until 534. Gelimer, the King of the Vandals and Alans from 530 to 534 AD, faced with the starvation of his followers and their children, and realizing he had no chance of regaining his kingdom of North Africa, surrendered to Flavius Belisarius, a general of the Byzantine Empire under Justinian I, at Bône. Byzantines then ruled Hippona (Hippo's new name after 395) before the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb in 699 AD. Later, Abbasids, Aghlabids, and Fatimids ruled Bona before the rise of the Zirids. It was relocated to its present place after flooding and Banu Hilal the ravages that occurred in 1033 during Hammadid rule. It was attacked by a Pisan fleet in 1034 and was conquered by Kingdom of Sicily in 1153. The Almohads took it in 1160.

Al-Bakri, in the 11th century, wrote about the city:"Bona is an ancient city, it is the city of Augustine, the scholar of Christianity. It is located on the coast of the sea, on a high and fortified piece of land overlooking the city of Seboussa. Today, it is called the city of Zawa, and it is about three miles away from the modern city. It has mosques, markets, and a public bath. The land is fertile, with fruits and crops. The modern city of Bona was surrounded by walls after the year 450 [Hijri year]. In the modern city of Bona, there is a well by the sea, carved in solid rock, called the well of Nithra, from which most of the inhabitants drink."
During the 11th century, the Banu Hilal, an Arab tribe living between the Nile and the Red Sea, settled in Tunisia, Tripolitania (western Libya) and Constantinois (eastern Algeria) which was the portion known as Annaba.
After the demise of the Almohads, the rule of the Hafsids began in Annaba in 1250. Hafsid rule was interrupted by brief occupations of the Marinids and Castile (in 1360) and ended with that of the Zayyanids. Rule by the Ottoman Empire began in 1533, and that lasted until French occupation in 1832, excepting rule by the Spanish Empire between 1535 and 1540. The Barbary pirates also lived in Annaba from the 16th through 19th centuries.

Modern
During the rule of France (empire and republics), this city was called Bône. It was one of the main French settlements, and it still has a sizeable minority of the "Pied-Noir". One notable pied-noir from Bône was General Alphonse Juin, a Marshal of France and then the Central European NATO Commander.
Construction was undertaken at Bône during 1856–69 to build an 80-hectare (200-acre) sheltered port to handle the iron ore from the Mokta el Hadid.
A short railroad line was built from the iron ore mine at Ain Mokra to the docks of Bône. This railway was opened in 1864, the first one to be built in Algeria. Full-scale production or iron ore began in 1865. Also in 1865, Emperor Napoleon III visited Algeria, including going to the mine and the city of Bône.
In 1865, the mine produced 22,000 tonnes of iron ore, which increased to 255,000 tonnes in 1869. The ore was extracted from underground galleries, and then shipped from Bône to the French iron and steel works. Before the mine was opened, Bône had just 10,000 inhabitants. By 1924, there were 41,000 people, and the port was being used to export phosphates, lead ore, and zinc ore, too.
During World War II in 1943, Bône was an important goal of the U.S. Army and British Army in Operation Torch, advancing eastward from Morocco, Oran, and Algiers across North Africa. Bône was a crucial highway and sea location for the invasion of Tunisia, and thence the driving of the Axis powers (Germany and Italy) out of Africa in May 1943.
Bône remained in Allied hands until the end of the war in 1945, and then it remained a part of French Algeria until the independence of Algeria in 1962.

Demography
The city of Annaba had a population of 257,359 in 2008 (General Census of the population and habitat). In 1988, the population of the urban district of Annaba had increased to 359,657 (with El Bouni comprising 111,956 inhabitants). The cities of If El Hadjar, and Sidi Amar are also included. Currently there are approximately 500,000 people in "greater Annaba". Today  Annaba has a population of 464,740 and 1,000,000 in greater Annaba.

Geography
The city is located in the northeastern corner of Algeria, close to the border with Tunisia. Annaba is near the small Seybouse River and is in located in the Annaba Province.

Climate
Annaba has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Csa in the Köppen climate classification) with long, hot, dry summers, especially from mid-July to mid-August, and mild, wet winters. Snow is rare but not unknown. Rain is abundant by North African standards and can be torrential.

Urban areas
The metropolitan area includes the cities of El Bouni, El Hadjar and Sidi Amar, which now form a circle around the city of Annaba. The city has grown dramatically since a major factory was opened at El Hadjar (10 km (6.2 mi) to the South) and provides employment for the entire region.
The downtown district of Annaba is on the sea-front, and includes the promenade called the Concours de la Revolution (previously called Le Cours Bertagna) which is a lively area, brimming with arcades and all kinds of covered restaurants, terraced cafes and kiosks. Annaba also has an international airport.

Education
One of Annaba's most notable educational institutions is the University of Annaba. As of 2004, there are over 40,000 students enrolled.

There is a branch campus of the French international school Lycée international Alexandre-Dumas.

Economy
As of 1911, Annaba was producing iron, zinc, cork, livestock, and cereal.
The city is an important hub of the world steel industry with the steel complex of El Hadjar, 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) south of the city. It is the largest in Africa. Phosphate and metal industries now include the Seybousa complex and the metallurgical complex of Allelik. The private industrial sector is also very important in Annaba and geared especially to the agri-food, metal processing, wood products and construction. These industrial areas occupy nearly 400 hectares (990 acres) between Bouchet Bridge, Meboudja, Berrahal and Kherraza. Business areas are also to be found in the suburbs of the city, such as Sidi Salem, El Eulma and Wadi El-Aneb.

Transportation
Annaba was described as the "chief seaport of Algeria after Oran and Algiers," by Baedeker's in 1911.
Annaba is served by Rabah Bitat Airport, an international airport whose IATA airport code is AAE. Annaba also has rail links to the Algerian cities of Constantine and Algiers, and it is at the end of Algeria's east–west highway. It is the second industrial centre in Algeria after the capital Algiers.

Tourism
Annaba is an important centre for tourism, and is one of the major tourist attractions in the western Mediterranean. It is a coastal city with mountains, hills, foothills, and plains surrounding it. Due to this, and aside from maritime and seaside tourism, Annaba has a key potential for mountain tourism. The mountains around Seraïdi which rise to 1,080 metres (3,540 ft), make them a major tourist attraction. Other tourist attractions are West Bay, Djenane el Bey (La Grande Plage), Ras el Hamra and Ain Achir beach.
Annaba also has various key religious sites, including the Saint Augustin Basilica. Annaba in its early history, was the site of an important and influential Diocese, prior to its destruction by the Vandals, and the era of Islamisation. Annaba is located on the Tunisian border, and is a visa-free area, hence tourists are also able to make side trips to Tunisia and to El Kala National Park.
Annaba is also known for its verdant Main Street (more often known as the Concours de la Revolution), which is a bustling promenade also well known for its night-life. The Annaba area is generally reputed for having scenic beaches, hotels and a bustling nightlife.
The War Cemetery at Bône lies 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) from Annaba on the road towards Constantine. It is an important memorial to the British Empire's soldiers and airmen who fought in the region during the World War II, with 868 Commonwealth burials there. There are also 14 other graves, mostly of merchant seamen. It was designed by J. Hubert Worthington. After the war, most of the American dead were repatriated for burial in the United States, but this was not traditional in the British Empire.

Notable people
Juba I of Numidia (ca. 85–46 BC), Berber king of Numidia and Mauretania
Juba II (ca. 48 BC – AD 23), son of Juba I, king of Numidia and spouse of Cleopatra Selene II
Augustine of Hippo (354–430), also known as Saint Augustine, Bishop of Hippo Regius (present-day Annaba)
Ahmad al-Buni, (died 1225), born in Bône (now Annaba), well-known Sufi and writer on the esoteric value of letters and topics relating to mathematics, sihr (sorcery) and spirituality.
Alphonse Juin (1888–1967), born in Bône, French pied-noir general during World Wars I & II
Raoul Borra (1896-1988), born in Bône, French politician
Mohamed Boudiaf (1919–1992), Algerian president, assassinated in Annaba
Robert Cohen (1930–2022), born in Bône, French boxer
Eustache Cuicci (1908-1980), French politician
Professor Alain Ferry (born 1939), writer, awarded the 2009 Prix Médicis
Edwige Fenech (born 1948), born in Bône, Italian actress
Michèle Victory (born 1958), French politician

In the arts
An engraving of a painting by J Salmon,  Town and Harbour of Bona, Africa. was published in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1837 along with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon entitled Bona, The Pirate's Song.

See also
European enclaves in North Africa before 1830
Edough Massif

Notes
Sources
External links

(in French) Annaba City
(in French) Annaba



====================================================================================================
SITE NAME: SKIKDA
COUNTRY: Algeria | TYPE: city | ERA: Various
COLLECTED: 2025-11-26 18:02:47
====================================================================================================



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SOURCE: Wikipedia-EN (en) | Words: 1,005
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skikda
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Skikda (Arabic: سكيكدة; formerly Philippeville from 1838 to 1962 and Rusicade in ancient times) is a city in northeastern Algeria and a port on the Mediterranean. It is the capital of Skikda Province and Skikda District.

History
The Phoenicians and Carthaginians established a trading post and fort named RŠKD (𐤓𐤔𐤊‬𐤃‬, "Jug Cape") after Skikda's nearby cape. Falling under Roman hegemony after the Punic Wars, the name was Latinized as Rusicade or Rusiccade. Rusicade contained the largest Roman theatre in Algeria, dating to the reign of Hadrian.
In late antiquity, the port was destroyed during the Vandals' invasion of 530. The Byzantines reconquered the region in 533 and 534, but left large areas under Berber control. The town was overrun by the Umayyad Caliphate at the end of the 7th century.
Present-day Skikda was founded by French governor Sylvain Charles Valée in 1838 under the name Philippeville, honoring the French king at the time. The French were in the process of annexing Algeria and developed Philippeville as a port for Constantine, Algeria's third-largest city. The two cities were connected by rail. The harbour works, with every vessel in port, was destroyed by a storm in 1878; a larger harbour was then built. On 10 October 1883, there was an earthquake in Philippeville.
Towards the end of World War II, a UNRRA refugee camp name Camp Jeanne d'Arc was established near the city. On 25 January 1945, 200 Jews holding citizenship from countries in North and South America were sent from the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp to Switzerland as part of a prisoner exchange group. They were later sent to the UNRRA camp in Skikda.

Battle of Philippeville
An attack by the FLN in 1955 during the war of Independence left around 123 civilians dead, mainly French and those suspected of collaboration. Angered over the massacre of civilians, including women, seniors, and babies, the French escalated their offensive against the FLN. Reprisals by French forces may have killed between 1,200 (according to French sources,) and 12,000 civilians (according to the FLN.)

1989 shipping disaster
The city has a commercial harbour with a gas and oil terminal. On 15 February 1989 the Dutch tanker the MV Maassluis was anchored just outside the port, waiting to dock the next day at the terminal, when extreme weather broke out. The ship's anchors did not hold and the ship smashed on the pier-head of the port. The disaster killed 27 of the 29 people on board.

Modern Skikda
The city has a population of over 250,000 inhabitant. Natural gas, oil refining, and petrochemical industries were developed in the 1970s and pipelines have been built for their transportation. The city hall (a neo-moorish style palace) and the railroad station were designed by Le Corbusier.
The official city flag colours are blue and white, reflecting the colours of the Mediterranean. The current postal code is 21000. Skikda has the third largest commercial port in Algeria after Algiers and Oran. It has also a petrochemical terminal port and a smaller fishing port in Stora, and there are many beaches along the natural Mediterranean coastline. There is also a closed airport near the petrochemical complex.

Geography
Skikda lies on the coast of the Gulf of Stora, part of the Mediterranean Sea. The landscape is hilly and forested, with high ridges on both the western and eastern sides of the city.

Climate
Skikda has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification Csa), with cool, wet winters and very warm, dry summers.

Economy
Historically, Skikda is known for its seaport. It was described, in 1911, by Baedeker as having "the youngest Algerian seaport."
On 19 January 2004, a fire and explosion at the Skikda LNG facility killed 29 people and caused $940,000,000 worth of damage.  The accident incapacitated three LNG trains and impacted approximately 2% of the world's liquefaction capacity. The explosion was preceded by the ingestion of a sizable leak of cold hydrocarbon into the boiler of the westernmost LNG line. This caused the boiler to explode. According to a 2018 report by Marsh McLennan on the 100 largest losses in the hydrocarbon industry, the Skikda explosion is the second most damaging gas processing incident since 1974.

Education
The University of Skikda is the main educational institution in the city and the province, with two campuses located in Azabba and Al-Hadaiq, attracting students from local, national, and international backgrounds. It offers a range of programs, including specialized courses in petrochemical engineering, which are key to the region's industrial development. The university plays a significant role in preparing students for careers in various fields, contributing to Skikda as a growing industrial and logistics city.

Sport
Football
Skikda, with football being the most popular. The city's top club, JSM Skikda, represents Skikda in national competitions and has the largest supporters base in the province. The team plays at the Skikda Stadium of 20 August 1955. In addition to JSM Skikda, there are other clubs and football academies competing in inter-regional leagues.

Handball
Handball is also a prominent sport in Skikda, with JS Esperance de Skikda being a dominant club that represent the city and province in the national league. The club is well-known for its success, having won numerous national and international titles and currently playing in the top tier.

Transportation
The main road from Skikda is the N3 to El Arrouch, Constantine, Batna, Biskra and Touggourt. Smaller local roads lead to the towns of Stora (to the northwest along the coast), Beni Bechir (to the south), Bissy and Azzaba (to the southeast), and El Mersa and Chetaibi (to the east).
Skikda is the terminus of the Algiers-Skikda line – one of the SNTF mainline railroads, although most passenger and cargo services branch off in nearby Ramdane Djamel (towards the Ramdane Djamel-Annaba or Ramdane Djamel-Jijel lines before reaching Skikda).

Notable people
Fadéla M'rabet (1935–2025), writer and feminist
Rose Celli (1895–1982), novelist, playwright, translator and poet

Photo Gallery
References
Citations
Bibliography
Huss, Werner (2006), "Rusicade", Brill's New Pauly Encyclopedia of the Ancient World, Leiden: Brill.

External links

Skikda District's Official Website

